The Project Gutenberg EBook of Nova analysis aquarum Medeviensium
by Jöns Jacob Berzelius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Nova analysis aquarum Medeviensium

Author: Jöns Jacob Berzelius

Release Date: November 16, 2003 [EBook #10054]

Language: Latin

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVA ANALYSIS AQUARUM MEDEVIENSIUM ***




Produced by Lars Aronsson and the Project Runeberg




"Nova analysis aquarum Medeviensium" is a scientific paper in Latin
about the quality of the water of the health spa at Medevi in Sweden,
published in 1800 by Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779-1848).

This e-text was produced for Project Gutenberg from Project Runeberg's
digital facsimile edition, available at http://runeberg.org/berzaqua/

This is a plain text file using the ISO 8859-1 (Latin-1) character set
(É,é = E,e-acute; Å,å = A,a-ring; Ä,ä = A,a-umlaut; Ö,ö = O,o-umlaut).

Project Runeberg publishes free digital editions of Nordic literature.
We need more volunteers like you.  Learn more at http://runeberg.org/




                        Regio Collegio Medico
                               Sacrum.

                            NOVA ANALYSIS
                         AQUARUM MEDEVIENSIUM

                                 Quam
                     Venia ampliss. ord. philos.
                                p. p.
                                Præses
                          Mag. A. G. EKEBERG
                           chem. Adjunctus
                  Reg. Acad. Scient. Stockh. Membr.
                                  ET
                                AUCTOR
                          JACOBUS BERZELIUS
                        Ostrog. Stip. Strandb.
               In audit Gust. Maj. D. VI Decemb. MDCCC.

                               Upsaliæ
             Litteris Joh. Fr. Edman, Reg. Acad. Typogr.




Table of Contents

Nova analysis aquarum Medeviensium
Vetus sive insimus fons
Fons Medius
Fons supremus
Limes Medeviensis
Fons Lokaënsis
Limus Lokaënsis




NOVA ANALYSIS AQUARUM MEDEVIENSIUM


Aquæ Medevienses a Cel. BERGMAN primum justa & consummata analysi
chemica exploratæ sunt. In actis Reg. Acad. Scient. Holm. An. 1783. P.
4, p. 218, hanc suam disquisitionem exposuit. Sed Cel. Medicus S. R.
M. Primarius etc. D. Doct. S. HEDIN, hujus institutionis præfenti
tempore curator (Brunns Intendent,) cum variare interdum naturam
fontium & elementorum rationem, assiduis nobilissimorum chemicorum
investigationibus confirmatum esse, & in recentissimis præterea chemiæ
profectibus majora ad disquisitiones hujus generis subtilius
instituendas subsidia esse posita reputaverit, æstate superiori novam
analysin suscipiendam esse censuit; eamque mihi, ad Medevi vices
Chirurgi, ejus auspicio, tunc gerenti, mandavit. Quam cura
diligentiaque quanta maxima potuerim peractam, propter magnam ab
experientia summi viri discrepantiam, eorum. qui his rebus student,
judicio esse submittendam existimavi. Et cum etjam celebratum Loka
fontem limumque, antea rite consummateque non examinatum, eadem hac
præterita æstate, ab ejus curatore D:o Doct. etc. ASCHAN sollicitatus,
adcurate sim perscrutatus, brevem ejus descriptionem, reservata in
aliam occasionem copiosiori experimentorum expositione, adjungere, ob
materiæ similitudinem, institui.

Ex tribus fontibus, quibus jam uti licet, unus tantum, & is infimus,
ante nostram ætatem scaturivit. Olim quidem tres etjam numero fuerunt
fontes; duo autem reliqui, quos Cel. BERGMAN Rödbrunn & Dahlbrunn
appellat, jam ita cessaverunt, ut ne locum quidem ubi siti fuerint,
reperire potuerim. At curante Cel. HEDIN alii duo nuper aperti sunt &
ædiculis belle superstructis hoc anno consummatis, tecti; ut
pauperibus usui essent, quibus antea circa horam tertiam matutinam
surgendi, necessitas erat, ne ex unica scaturigine petita aqua
opulentioribus ad horam sextam fontem adeuntibus deesset.




Vetus sive infimus fons.


Situs ejus est aliquanto depressior, ita tamen ut defluxus sit
facilis. Intra ædificium alto muro circumdatur, qui ad æquabile frigus
conservandum plurimum confert. Profundus est V pedes. Cantharos
circiter LX per horam effundit, cli temporisque varietate parum
affectus. Temperatura in superficie + 6,º5; ad fundum 6,º intra menses
æstivos non mutata. Sapor asper, multis nauseosus. Odor concussione
exprimitur hepaticus. In aperto vase sensim oxidum ferri demittit, &
odorem saporemque asperum perdit. Tincturam Heliotropii rubefacit, at
non post coctionem ferrive demissionem. Calce soluta turbatur, sed non
post coctionem. Acidum carbonicum in aqua ita prodi docent, si primo
calcis solutionem turbaverit, uberius autem adfusa solverit quæ
præcipitata erant; quod vero hic non incidit, cum ferrum etjam
præcipitetur, ex quo præcipitarum flavescit; in aqua autem nihil vel
parum adsir liberi acidi carbonici. Cum acido sulphurico forti nulla
effervescentia. Solutiones Fernambuci aut Curcumæ non mutatæ. Cum ac.
gallaceo color violaceus; prussiate kali cæruleus purissimus; ex quo
post quietem XXIV horarum prussias ferri depositus; utrumque in aqua
cocta inefficax. Acidum oxalicum paullulum permutavit, sed non in
cruda solum, verum etjam in cocta; quod sulphatem calcis prodit.
Carbonas kali nihil. Natrum purum post horas XXIV luteolum
præcipitatum effecit. Similiter ammoniacum. Aliquantulum ac. azotici
in aquæ portionem instillabatur, quæ dein azotate barytæ
præcipitabatur: pauxillum illud, quod post h. XXIV demissum erat, inde
separabatur, quo facto aqua azotate argenti præcipitabatur; hoc
præcipitatum suisse muriatem argenti exinde colligimus, quod luci
expositum nigrescebat; quod in carbonatibus argenti non accidit.
Azotas hydrargyri frigide præparatus album dedit & subtile
præcipitatum, ad labra vitri adhærens, & vix sensibile antequam aqua
effusa, vitrum aruisser. Azotas hydr. calide præparatus & azotas
plumbi præcipitata fecerunt e luteo candicantia. Ad detegendum in aqua
hydrogenium sulphuratum multa sunt a chemicis proposita, at pleraque
non nisi in aquis saturatoribus efficacia. Ejusmodi sunt: argentum
metallicum; sed in fonte suspensus nummus argenteus bene politus post
IIX dies æque splendebat; oxidum arsenici album; id vero in hac aqua
æquali tempore nihil passum est; acidum azoticum conc. quod,
hydrogenium oxidando sulphur præcipitare docent; illud autem heic
nihil tale effecit. Nihilominus olfactus hydrogenii sulphurati in hac
aqua index certissimus est. Azotas plumbi in forma sicca ad hydr.
sulph. valde sensibilis est; at solurus, propter suam ad aquam
attractionem, sulphure difficilius decomponitur. Scribebam autem hac
solutione in charta, quæ vasi, in quo aqua fontana evaporaretur,
superimponebatur: vas sensim calefactum est, ut gas hydr. sulph.
quantum fieri posset siccum eliceretur: qua re etjam factum est, ut
litteræ seriptæ, pro varia gasis siccitate, quibusdam in locis
metallice splenderent & nigrescerent; aliis magis minusve perspicuæ,
aliis non observabiles essent.

Post hæc experimenta præcursoria, nostra in eo verfat, est opera, ut
quæ in hac aqua soluta sint gasia fecernerentur. Quantum aquæ
Cantharus unus capere potest [1] in vas retortum vitreum instillabatur
ejus magnitudinis, ut tertia pars vacua maneret: orificium subere
obturabatur, per quod aptatus erat tubus vitreus; cui vesica arcte
adligabatur. Tubus ad apparatum pneumaticium ducebat. Aqua, qua hunc
appatatum impleveram, quartam horæ partem cocta erat, & jam intra
temperaturam + 85º & 100º, igne subtus facto, servabatur. Supra enim
in recipulo pneumatico olei stratum fluitabat, ne, experimento
peracto, gas ab aqua refrigerata imbiberetur. Quamquam aqua, ut
diximus, antea diu servisset, bullæ tamen aëris jam exinde per oleum
adscendentes animadvertebantur, ex cucurbita non venientes. Gas, quod
in apparatu pneumatico, postquam aqua in cucurbita horæ tres quartas
partes servisset, receptum erat, minoris aliquanto voluminis fuit eo,
quod supra aquam in cucurbita fuerat, utroque in eadem temperatura
menso; ex quo sequitur, vapores aquosos non omnem ex superiori
cucurbitæ parte aërem expulisse; quapropter hac methodo nihil certi de
quantitate naturave gasium in aqua fontana solutorum eruere
licet. Alia igitur utendum erat. Nec apparatum a Cel. BERGMAN (Om
Bitter-, Selzer-, Spa- och Pyrmontervattens halt och tillredning, §
8. Fig. 1.) comparare poteram. Hanc igitur, scopo, ut videtur, optime
inservientem experiundi rationem inveni. Orificium lagenæ vitreæ,
adcurate ejus capacitatem emensus, subere optimo obturabam, per quod
tubus vitreus, ut in experimentis pneumaticis solet, curvatus
ingerebatur ita, ut altera ejus extremitas ultra suber in lagena non
exstaret. Et lagena & huic ita adjunctus tubus aqua examinanda
implebantur, ne minima quidem aëris atmosphærici bulla observabili
relicta. Lagena ad commissuram luto vesicaque rite munita, in balneo
arenæ ponebatur.  Apparatu pneumatico eodem as supra utebar; sed jam
aqua plus horam ante initium experimenti fervisser. (Vas, in quo
fervebat, ejus capacitatis erat, ut quod exhalaret cruda aqua
compensare opus non esset). In ipso recipulo apparatus aqua, ut ante,
oleo operiebatur.  Huic methodo aliquis objicere forsitan posset,
aquam fontanam in lagena calore valde dilatari ante quam gasia exinde
abeant; ita partem expelli & amitti. Sed ubi hæc pars aquæ venerit in
aquam bullientem apparatus pneumatici sub recipulum, gasia, quibus
prægnans est, mox hujus calore in formam nativam restituta, effugere
nequeunt. Postquam horæ dimidium aqua in lagena fervisset,
summovebatur sensim ignis ad cautam refrigerationem. In temperatura
+17º volumen gasium dimensum fuit 6,5 pollicum cubicorum decimalium
pro quoque cantharo. Cel.  BERGMAN 14 p. cub. ex. Cantharo
accepit. Hæc discrepantia experimentum pluries iterare jussit; idem
autem semper fuit eventus, si aberrationem 1/2 vel 3/4
p. c. exceperis, tribuendam temperaturæ , quam omnino æqualem obtinere
non poteram. Iuncturam autem nec rimis latentibus fefellisse, tum
illius post singula experimenta sollicita exploratio demonstravit, cum
regressus aquæ ex apparatu pneumatico in lagenam frigescentem.

  [1] Hoc loco & in sequentibas mensura coronata & accurate explorata
  utebar.

Ad vulgare præscriptum solutio calcis in gase his experimentis
collecto collocabatur. Post XXXVI horas ex 6,5 p. c. dimidius tantum
restabat, quam aëra esse atmosphæricum gas azoticum oxigenatum
indicavit. Quorsum igitur gas hydrogenium sulphuratum, quod aquæ
inesse certo sciebam? Id quo intëlligerem, lagenam, hoc gase,
præparato ex sulphureto ferri ac acido sulphurico diluto, impletam
supra calcem aqua solutam collocavi. Post XIV horas X p. c. absorpti
erant; supererat unus cum dimidio p. c., post XXIV horas nihil
diminutus; quem esse atmosphæricum, gase azotico oxigenato
exploravi. Gas hydr. sulph. & gas acidi carbonici ad æqualia volumina
commixta & eidem experimento subjecta, ab aqua calcarea, uno
p. c. relicto,. absorbebantur. Solutionis calcareæ in his
experimentis, & præcipue in superiori, color erat luteoalbidus, odor
saporque sulphureti calcarei; solutio sensim sulphatem calcis
deponendo turbabatur, quod tamen in posteriori propter carbonatem
calcis simul præcipitatum discerni non poterat. Ex quibus
intelligitur, diminutionem supra descriptam gasis aquæ examinandæ non
acido tantum carbonico sed gasi etjam hydr. sulph. esse tribuendam.
Horum igitur gasium quantitates alia via dignoscendæ sunt. Eum in
finem unum aquæ fontanæ Cantharum in vase operto calce præcipitabam;
præcipitatum, cujus pondus erat = 0,085 [2] ex oxido ferri = 0,020,
carbonate calcis magnesiæque aquæ proprio, aliis experimentis noto =
0,035, & carbonate calcis jam generato, cujus igitur pondus = 0,030,
constabat. Si pondera carbonatis calcis & acidi carb. quod continet,
sunt inter se = 100:43, oritur exinde pondus acidi carbonici ex aqua
fontana recepti = 0,014; ex quo tamen volumen gasis ejus haud facile
inveniri potest.

  [2] Unitas ponderis per totam banc disfertationem = 1/4 lod
  viktualie-vigt = 1 drachma 7 1/2 gr. = 1 centner prober-vigt.

Unde autem oritur hujus aquæ gas hydrogenium sulphuratum? In quibusdam
aquis non dubium est quin originem debeat sulphureto calcis, quod, dum
ex aqua oxidatur, ideoque gas hydrogenium generat, illi sulphuris
aliquid tradit; ipsum autem in sulphatem calcis transit, qui circum
tales fontes, forma pulveris albi, se manifestat. In aqua Medeviensi
sulphas quidem calcis adest, quem primo sulphuretum fuisse posse,
deinde vero oxidatum, hoc gas, ut diximus, produxisse, haud quidem
districte negaverim, vero tamen similius esse existimaverim, a stratis
corporum organicorum putrefactorum vel putrescentium, per quæ vena
transit, idem illud gas originem duxisse, quippe quod destructione
animalium vegetabiliumque generari, ideoque ex stagnosis limosisque
locis, præsertim commotione quadam facta, exhalari noverimus. Per hanc
hypothesin explicatur etjam ortus gasis hydrogenii carbonati, quod in
hoc & pluribus aliis Sveciæ fontibus adesse, cum alia fere desint
ipsius indicia, sapor peculiaris certe arguit; quamquam ejus
quantitas, propter minorem in aqua solubilitatem longe minor sit,
necesse est; nec determinari potest nisi combustione; quam experiri,
defectus instrumentorum prohibuit.

Ex quovis fonte V Cantharos, in vase vitreo, unum cum dimidio
cancharum capiente, singulos vaporare curavi. Massa sicca caute
colligebatur, & quod vitro arctius adhærebat, acido muriatico diluto
abluebatur & solutioni N. 5 addebatur. Massæ in temp. + 108 siccatæ
pondus =0,575.

1. Massa diligenter aqua eluebatur & liquidum siphone secernebatur,
quo colatio evitaretur. Hæc aqua deinceps ad siccum vaporabat, supra
infundebatur alcohol, qui non solutum reliquit album terrestre =
0,025, quod experimentis infra enarrandis sulphatem calcis esse
reperi.

2. Solutio alcoholina lente evaporabatur; fusca erat, & crystallos
muriatis natri facile agnoscibiles in reliqua massa fusca
deliquescibili dabat [3]. Pondus totius massæ = 0,150. In aqua
solvebatur, cui solutioni admistum ammoniacum purum nihil mutavit; sed
azotate barytæ præcipitatum efficiebatur, quod lotum siccatumque erat
= 0,01. & azotate argenti præcipitatum cinereum, in lamella vitrea
supra ignem odorem empyreumaticum spargens, quo manifestatur extractum
vegetabile: id igitur coctione cum acido azotico conc. destruebatur;
quod hujus acidi supererat, ammoniaco dein saturabatur, quod primo
præcipitatum faciebat, mox solvebat; quapropter acidum muriaticum ad
saporem acidulum addebatur.  Murias argenti bene elotus & siccatus
niveo fuit colore & pondere = 0,240.

  [3] Sales cum extracto conjunctos difficulter crystallisari, notisi
  mum est.

3. Ex reliqua solutionis parte argentum superfluum muriate ammoniaci
præcipitabatur: dein inspissabatur, nihilque acido oxalico tartaricove
afficiebatur; quapropter nec kali nec calcem habebat.

4. Residuum ex lotione cum aqua N. 1 cum alcohole eluebatur, quod
evaporando dedit refinam odoram fuscam = 0,005.

5. Residuum ex massa alcohole elota N. 4 acido muriatico diluto
solvebatur; solutio secernebatur, & quod solutum non erat, aqua
eluebatur, quæ dein solutioni admiscebatur. Hæc ad dimidiam partem
evaporata ammoniaco præcipitabatur; præcipitatum elotum fuit = 0,15.
Reliqua solutio, cum aqua lotionis, carbonete ammoniaci
præcipitabatur, quod carbonatem calcis = 0,125 dedit. Calcem fuisse
inde colligitur, quod cum acido sulphurico sal difficulter solubile
efficiebat, nec carbonare ammoniaci solvebatur; ideoque magnesia non
erat.

6. Quod ammoniaco præcipitatum erat, in acido sulphurico solvebatur;
residua erat magnesia, quæ acid. sulph. dilato difficulter solvitur,
si pura est; pondus erat = 0,03. Acido muriatico soluta carbonate
ammoniaci procipitabatur [4] & mox ab eo solvebatur; quæ magnesiæ nota
est.

  [4] BERGMAN & secundum eum plures alii, magnesiæ ad acida
  attractionem majorem statuunt quam ammoniaci. Alii negant; cum ex
  acid. sulphurico ammoniaco præcipitetur. BERGMAN (In Opusculis T. 3
  p. 317 & 337) hoc præcipitatum inde oriri contendit quod in
  solutione sal tripliciter compositum generaretur. Qua de re hæc
  sequentia ipse sum expertus. Si Murias magnesiæ cum carbonate kali
  præcipitatur, usque dum reagat alcali, & præcipitatum inde
  separatur, præcipitari dein potest cum ammoniaco puro nova magnesiæ
  portio. Idem evenit, si ordine inverso primo adhibetur ammoniacum
  purum & deinde Carbonas kali. Sulphas magnesiæ carbonate kali totus
  decomponitur; at si plus carbonatis kali additur, solvitur iterum
  praecipitatum, & post horas quasdam crystalli formantur. Idem
  evenit, si præcipitatio ope carbonatis ammoniaci perficitur. Etjam
  ex muriate magnesiæ præcipitando formantur hi sales; si solutio
  valde diluta est, nihil carbonate ammoniaci praecipitatur; si
  aliquantom puri ammoniaci additur, præcipitatum oritur quod
  carbonate ammoniaci, si sufficiens ejus quantitas adsit, solvitur &
  crystallisatur eam in formam, quam BERGMAN, Opusc. T. 1 Tab. 1.
  depinxit & carbonatis magnesiæ esse dixit; sed. ut ex allatis
  sequitur, ammoniacum etjam continet, quod in auctiore calore
  effugit, & magnesiæ carbonatem pulverulentum relinquit. Solutio
  muriatis magnesiæ valde diluta non præcipitatur carbonate ammoniaci,
  sed tantum si concentrata sit; tum autem præcipitatum est triplex
  ille sal, cujus supra mentionem fecimus, sere difficulter
  solubilis. Carbonates alcalium solvunt carbonatem magnesiæ, &
  efficiunt sales crystallisabiles difficulter solubiles. Murias
  ammoniaci carbonatem magnesiæ solvit, sed pars decomponitur & sal
  triplex nascitur. Alcalia pura solvunt carbonatem magnesiæ ita, ut
  se acido carbonico saturent, & quod superest carbonatis magnesiæ
  solvant; quod de ammoniaco non valet; cum carbonas ammoniaci puram
  magnesiam ita solvat, ut hæe primum ab ammoniaco rapiat ad se acidum
  carbonicum. Fourcroy & Vauquelin, in analysi urinæ, Bulletin des
  Sciences An. 1798 N. IX, propensitatem magnesiæ ad triplicem
  conjunctionem cum ammoniaco & acido phosphorico memoraverunt. Hæc
  magnesiæ proprietas accuratiore disquisitione digna esse vi detur.

Solutio in acido sulphurico facta, ad siccum evaporabatur; quod dum
fiebat, crystalli sulphatis calcis formabantur: massa sicca
ustulabatur donec effugisset ac. sulphuricum; residui pondus = 0,125;
quæ ponderis auctio majori ferri oxidationi tribuenda esse videretur,
quam etjam color & vapores acidi sulphurosi indicabant.

7. Massa usta lavabatur aqua, ex qua nec ammoniacum nec carbonates
alcalium aliquid præcipitabant. Dein ac. muriatico solvebatur, ex qua
solutione murias barytæ præcipitatum effecir, quod sulphatem calcis =
0,02 adhuc remansisse indicabat. Etjam oxalas kali calcis præsentiam
docebat. Puro ammoniaco oxidum ferri purum præcipitabatur = 0,10.

8. Solutio N. 5, ex qua calx carbonate ammoniaci præcipitate erat, in
siccum evaporabatur; cum acido sulphurico miscebatur & urebatur donec
acid, muriaticum effugisset; iterum solvebatur, & ammoniaco
præcipitabatur; quo secernebatur magnesia = 0,02.

9. Quod post solutionem in acido muriatico supererat, aqua difficulter
solvebatur; at aqua postquam diutius superinfusa mansisset, &
solutione barytæ & acid. oxalico præcipitabatur; coctum in carbonate
natri generavit sulphatem natri, & quod non solvebatur, effervescebat
aliquantulum, adfuso acido quodam; fuit igitur sulphas calcis = 0,140.

Hæ omnes rationes si conferuntur; animadvertitur auctio = 0,040, quæ
tribuenda est iis particulis, quæ ex vase, in quo facta erat
evaporatio, acido muriatico eluebantur.

Salis N. 2 pondus erat = 0,150; murias argenti = 0,240 continet ac.
muriaticum = 0,043, quod ad plenam saturarionem requirit natrum =
0,065 & aquam ad crystallisandum = 0,022, quo quantitas muratis narri
invenitur = 0,130. Sulphas barytæ, ibidiem, = 0,010 continet ac.
sulphuricum = 0,003; quod saturatur natro = 0,005, ex quo quantitas
sulphatis natri = 0,08. Residuum fuit extractum & aqua & alcohole
solubile = 0,012.

Sequens tabula exhiber, quantum ex meis quidem experimentis concludere
licuit, quantitates corporum in quovis hujus aquæ cantharo solutorum;
cui adjungitur tabula Cel. Prof. BERGMAN, loco supra citato allata.

  Secundum experimenta              Secundum mea
    BERGMANNI
  Gas acidi carbonici -   6 p. c.   Gas ac. carb.
  Gas hydr. sulph.    -   8         cum gase hydr.
                                    sulph.         -     6 p. c.
                                    Aër athmosph.  -   0,5
                      -----                          -----
                            14                             6 1/2
  Murias natri     -  0,005         Murias natri   - 0,026
  Oxidum ferri     -  0,056         Oxid. ferri    - 0,020
  Extractum mucil. -  0,019         Extract. muc.  - 0,003
      -       -    -    -           Sulphas natri  - 0,001
      -       -    -    -           Sulphas calcis - 0,037
      -       -    -    -           Carbonas calc. - 0,025
      -       -    -    -           Carb. magnes.  - 0,010
      -       -    -    -           Resinæ         - 0,001
  Murias calcis    -  0,009            -           -   -
                      -----                          -----
                      0,089                          0,123




Fons Medius


In ipso fere plano soli circumjacentis scatet; reliqui duo
depressiores. Aqua per duo foramina crateris emittitur, ideoque fere
semper turbida est. Temperatura variat. D 1 Junii erat in fundo +7°;
in superficie 7,°5; in atmosphæra 8° vel 9° D. 30 Julii in fundo 9,5
in superficie 10,° in atmosphæra 19° vel 20°. Quantitas gasium per
cantharum aquæ hujus fontis est 1 1/2 p. cub. major, quam reliquorum;
odore hydrogenii sulph. fortiori & quadam virtute laxante prædita est.
Ejus partes constitutivæ eædem sunt, ac fontis supra descripti,
excepto, quod minus ferri (= 0,015) & carbonatis calcis (= 0,080)
habet, quod etjam quantitatem acidi carbonici minorem indicare
videtur.




Fons supremus.


Situs hujus fontis editior est, quam ceterorum. Sapor veteris fontis
sapori similis est. Reactio eadem. Temperatura variat. D. 1 Jun. erat
in fundo + 6,°5; in superficie 7.° D. 30 Jul. in fundo + 8° in
superficie 9.° Ferri quantitas eadem est ac in vetere fonte, sulphatis
calcis major (= 0,045); carbonatis calcis & magnesiæ minor. Sales
reliqui sunt iidem in omnibus his fontibus.




Limus Medeviensis.


Non admodum profunde sub ipsa soli superficie reperitur. Scripturam
azotate plumbi factam afficit. Schidiis & aliis reliquiis
vegetabilibus immixtus est. Ustione duas partes tertias ponderis
perdit; residuum constat ex ferro, silice & sulphate calcis. Sulphatem
ferri, ut limus Lokaënsis, non continet. Una ejus tertia pars est
extractiva, & alkohole & aqua solubilis.




Fons Lokaënsis.


Ejus partes constitutivas eadem fere ratione, qua fontium
Medeviensium, exploratas has sequentes reperi.

  Gas Hydrog. sulph. & perpaullulum
     Gasis acidi carbonici       -    -   2   p. c.
  Aër atmospæricus               -    -   3,5
     ex quo gas oxigenium        -   0,5
          & gas azotum           -   3,0
                                         ------
                                               5,5 p. c.
  Carbonas calcis                -    -  0,0042
  Carbonas magnesiæ              -    -  0,0035
  Silex                          -    -  0,0107
  Sulphas calcis                 -    -  0,0023
  Murias natri                   -    -  0,0055
  Extractivum                    -    -  0,0014
  Aliquantulum resinæ            -    -
                                         ------
  per Cantharum                          0,0276




Limus Lokaënsis,


  In quaque libra continentur
     Gas ac. carb. & hydrog. sulph.   -  2,6
     Aër atmosphæricus                -  0,3
     Gas hydrogenium carbonatum       -  0,8
                                        -----
                                         3,7 p. cub.
     Aquosum                          -  9,5 lod.
  Limus siccatus = 4, continet
     Extractum                        -  0,045
     Sulphas calcis                   -  0,010
     Sulphas ferri                    -  0,005
     Combustibilia                    -  1,402
     Oxidum ferri                     -  0,172
     Argilla                          -  0,075
     Carbonas magnesiæ                -  0,020
     Silex                            -  2,232
     Aliquantulum carb. calcis        -
                                         -----
                                         3,961
     Addito quod deficit                 0,039
                                         -----
                                         4,000



End of text.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Nova analysis aquarum Medeviensium
by Jöns Jacob Berzelius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOVA ANALYSIS AQUARUM MEDEVIENSIUM ***

***** This file should be named 10054-8.txt or 10054-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/5/10054/

Produced by Lars Aronsson and the Project Runeberg

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


