The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tartarin de Tarascon, by Alphonse Daudet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tartarin de Tarascon

Author: Alphonse Daudet

Release Date: January 11, 2004 [EBook #10687]

Language: French (with English)

Character set encoding: ISO Latin-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARTARIN DE TARASCON ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, Renald Levesque and PG Distributed Proofreaders







TARTARIN DE TARASCON

PAR

ALPHONSE DAUDET




WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES,  AND EXERCISES

BY

BARRY CERF

ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF ROMANCE LANGUAGES IN
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN




PREFACE


The test of this edition is reprinted without alteration from that of the
"Collection Guillaume" (E. Flammarion, Paris, publisher).

"Tartarin de Tarascon" should be read by high-school students at the end
of their second or in their third year and by college students at the end
of the first or in the second year.

It is with great pleasure that I express my indebtedness for many
suggestions to my friend Professor W.F. Giese of the University of
Wisconsin.

B.C.

MADISON, WISCONSIN




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
TEXT
  PREMIER EPISODE: A TARASCON
    I. Le jardin du baobab.
   II. Coup d'oeil general jete sur la bonne ville de Tarascon; les
       chasseurs de Casquettes.
  III. Nan! nan! nan! Suite du coup d'oeil general jete sur la bonne ville
       de Tarascon.
   IV. Ils!!!
    V. Quand Tartarin de Tarascon allait au cercle.
   VI. Les deux Tartarins.
  VII. Les Europeens a Shang-hai. Le Haut Commerce. Les Tartares. Tartarin
       de Tarascon serait-il un imposteur? Le mirage.
 VIII. La menagerie Mitaine. Un lion de l'Atlas a Tarascon. Terrible et
       solennelle entrevue!
   IX. Singuliers effets du mirage.
    X. Avant le depart.
   XI. Des coups d'epee, messieurs, des coups d'epee, mais pas de coups
       d'epingle!
  XII. De ce qui fut dit dans la petite maison du baobab.
 XIII. Le depart.
  XIV. Le port de Marseille. Embarque! embarque!

  DEUXIEME EPISODE CHEZ LES TEURS

    I. La traversee. Les cinq positions de la chechia. Le soir du
       troisieme jour. Misericorde!
   II. Aux armes! aux armes!
  III. Invocation a Cervantes. Debarquement. Ou sont les Teurs? Pas de
       Teurs.
       Desillusion.
   IV. Le premier affut.
    V. Pan! Pan!
   VI. Arrivee de la femelle. Terrible combat. Le Rendez-vous des Lapins.
  VII. Histoire d'un omnibus, d'une Mauresque et d'un chapelet de fleurs
       De Jasmin.
 VIII. Lions de l'Atlas, dormez!
   IX. Le prince Gregory du Montenegro.
    X. Dis-moi le nom de ton pere, et je te dirai le nom de cette fleur.
   XI. Sidi Tart'ri ben Tart'ri.
  XII. On nous ecrit de Tarascon.

  TROISIEME EPISODE: CHEZ LES LIONS

    I. Les diligences deportees.
   II. Ou l'on voit passer un petit monsieur.
  III. Un couvent de lions.
   IV. La caravane en marche.
    V. L'affut du soir dans un bois de lauriers-roses.
   VI. Enfin!
  VII. Catastrophes sur catastrophes.
 VIII. Tarascon! Tarascon!

NOTES
EXERCISES





INTRODUCTION


ALPHONSE DAUDET

(_Nimes, May 13, 1840; Paris, December 16, 1897_)

Alphonse Daudet was born in the ancient Provencal city of Nimes, near the
Rhone, May 13, 1840. In this same year Emile Zola, destined like Daudet to
pass his youth in Provence, was born at Paris.

As a result of the commercial upheaval which attended the revolution of
1848, Daudet's father, a wealthy silk manufacturer, was ruined. After a
hard struggle he was forced to give up his business at Nimes and moved to
Lyons (1849). He was not successful here, and finally, in 1856, the family
was broken up. The sons now had to shift for themselves.

These first sixteen years of Alphonse Daudet's life were far from unhappy.
He had found delight in exploring the abandoned factory at Nimes. His
school days at Lyons were equally agreeable  to the young vagabond. His
studies occupied him little; he loved to wander through the streets of the
great city, finding everywhere food for fanciful speculation. He would
follow a person he did not know, scrutinizing his every movement, and
striving to lose his own identity in that of the other, to live the
other's life. His frequent days of truancy he spent in these idle rambles,
or in drifting down the river. Literary ambition had already seized him;
he had written a novel (of which no trace remains) and numerous verses.
Notwithstanding his lack of application to study, he had succeeded in
completing the course of the _lycee_.

In 1856 when it became certain that the father could no longer care for
the family, the mother and daughter took refuge in the home of relatives;
Ernest, the older of the two surviving sons, sought his fortune in the
literary circles of Paris; and Alphonse accepted a position as "master of
the study hall" (_maitre d'etudes, pion_) at the college of Alais in the
Cevennes. The boy was too young, too delicate, and too sensitive to be
able to endure the mental suffering and humiliation to which he was
subjected at the hands of the bullies of this school.[1] After a year of
martyrdom he set out on his terrible journey to Paris. Here he was
welcomed by his brother Ernest.

[Footnote 1: See "Le Petit Chose," "Little What's-His-Name."]

The two brothers had always felt and always continued to feel the closest
sympathy for each other. Ernest believed in Alphonse's genius more than in
his own, and bestowed on his younger brother the motherly devotion which
Alphonse so gratefully  and tenderly acknowledges in "Le Petit Chose," his
romantic autobiography, where Ernest appears as "ma mere Jacques."

The first years in Paris were the darkest in the brothers' lives. They
could earn scarcely enough to satisfy their most pressing needs, but both
were happy, since they were in Paris. Before Alphonse's arrival Ernest had
secured regular employment on a newspaper. Alphonse was longing for
recognition as a poet, but to earn his living he was forced to turn to
prose. His contributions to _Le Figaro_ and other newspapers soon made him
known. He wrote little and carefully, nor did he forget his literary
ideals even when poverty might have excused hurried productions in the
style best calculated to sell. His literary conscience was as strong under
the trying circumstances of his debut as later when success brought
independence.[2]

[Footnote 2: See E. Daudet, "_Mon Frere et moi_," pp. 151-152. Daudet
frequently says of himself that he was by nature an improviser, that the
labor of meticulous composition to which he forced himself was a torture,
yet he remained always true to his ideal.]

During this period he lived among the Bohemians of the Parisian world of
letters; but, though he shared their joys and sorrows, he seems to have
emerged unscathed from the dangers of such an existence. Zola met Daudet
at this time and has left us an attractive picture of him: "He was in the
employ of a successful newspaper, he used to bring in his article, receive
his remuneration, and disappear with the nonchalance of a young god, sunk
in poetry, far from the petty cares of this world. He was living, I think,
outside of the city, in a remote corner with other poets, a band of joyous
Bohemians. He was beautiful, with the delicate, nervous beauty of an
Arabian horse, an ample mane, a silky divided beard, large eyes, a thin
nose, a passionate mouth, and, to crown all that, a certain flash of
light, a breath of tender voluptuousness, which bathed his whole face in a
smile that was both roguish and sensual. There was in him something of the
Parisian Street gamin and something of the Oriental woman."[1]

[Footnote 1: "Les Romanciers naturalistes," pp. 256-257.]

Daudet's first volume was a collection of verse, "Les Amoureuses" (1858,
published by Tardieu, a Provencal). These simple poems are charming in
their freshness and naivete, and established Daudet's reputation as a
writer of light verse. The whole volume, and especially "Les Prunes,"
attracted the attention of the Empress Eugenie. At her solicitation Daudet
was made one of the secretaries of the powerful Duke of Morny, president
of the _corps legislatif_ (1860). His duties were purely nominal. He now
had money enough to keep the wolf from his door and was free to devote
himself to literature.

It was at this time that the stage began to attract him. His first play,
"La Derniere Idole," was produced at the Odeon in 1862. Almost every other
year between 1862 and 1892 a new play, on untried themes, or adapted from
one of his novels and usually written in collaboration, appeared at a
Parisian theater. Of all these only one, "L'Arlesienne" (1872), is worthy
of its author.

Already in 1859, as a result of the suffering of the preceding years and
lack of precautions, his health had begun to fail. He spent the winters of
1861-1864 in Algeria, Corsica, and Provence.  These voyages were of vital
importance in his development.  He learned something of the world and
became better fitted to study conditions in his own narrow sphere; at the
same time he acquired the power of vigorous description and collected
material for some of his finest short stories and for the Tartarin series.

A portion of the summer of 1861 he dreamed away in an abandoned mill[1]
near Fontvieille, between Tarascon and Arles. From here he sent to the
Parisian newspapers _L'Evenement_ and _Le Figaro_ those delightful stories
and sketches which were gathered and published in 1869 under the title
"Lettres de mon moulin." Of all the many volumes of Daudet's collected
works this is the most satisfying: it is here that the distinctive
products of his genius are to be sought; and it is on these stories, with
a few from later collections, and on "Tartarin de Tarascon," that his
claim to immortality will finally rest. It is here that we find several of
his most excellent stories: "Le Secret de maitre Cornille", "La Chevre de
M. Seguin", "La Mule du pape", "Le Cure de Cucugnan", "L'Elixir du
reverend pere Gaucher" and others.

[Footnote 1: Daudet did not live in the mill which he has made famous, but
he spent there "de longues journees"; he never owned it, but the deed
which serves so picturesquely as preface to his book is not entirely
apocryphal. See "Trente Ans de Paris," p. 164.]

In 1865, at the death of Morny, he gave up his secretaryship and applied
himself exclusively to literature.

In 1866 he met Julie Allard, and early the next year they were married. To
his wife, a lady of exquisite taste, Daudet owed unfailing encouragement
and competent, sympathetic criticism.

"Le Petit Chose," his first long work, had been begun in 1866 during his
stay in Provence; it was published in 1868. The first part, which is of
great interest, is largely autobiographical and covers the childhood and
youth of the writer up to his first years in Paris; the second part is a
colorless romance of no particular merit. Daudet himself confessed that
the work had been written too soon and with too little reflection. "I wish
I had waited," he said; "something good might have been written on my
youth".[1]

[Footnote 1: See "Trente Ans de Paris," pp. 75, 85, and Sherard, "Alphonse
Daudet," p. 301.]

"Tartarin de Tarascon" was written in 1869.

Success and happiness had crowned Daudet's efforts. He was spending his
time in all tranquility, now at Paris, now at Champrosay, where he
occupied the house of the painter Delacroix. Suddenly in July, 1870, the
war cloud burst. Daudet lay stretched out on his bed fretfully nursing a
broken leg. On his recovery he shouldered his gun and joined in the
hopeless defense of Paris.

It was the war that killed the old Daudet and brought into existence the
new. Before the war, Daudet himself confesses it, he had lived free from
care, singing and trifling, heedless of the vexing problems of society and
the world, his heart aglow with the fire of the sun of his native
Provence. The war awakened in our sensitive poet a seriousness of purpose
which harmonized but little with his native genius. Among his friends he
never lost his old-time buoyant gaiety; but his works from now on show
only a trace of it. The charming "Belle-Nivernaise" (1886), a few
"tarasconades," a gleam here and there in all his works, remind us of our
old friend and plead for our sympathy with the new.

During the next few years he added to his reputation as a writer of short
stories; to this period belong several collections of tales and sketches:
"Lettres a un absent" (1871), "Contes du lundi" (1873), "Les Femmes
d'artistes" (1874), "Robert Helmont" (1874). A few of the stories are
still more or less in the manner of the "Lettres de mon moulin" ("Le Pape
est mort," "Un Reveillon dans le marais," "Les Emotions d'un perdreau
rouge"), but all these volumes, except "Les Femmes d'artistes," are
inspired by the war. The playfulness of the youthful Daudet is still
apparent here and there in the war stories ("La Pendule de Bougival," "Les
Petits Pates"), but a sterner tone is prevalent.

The great novels which now follow are the fruit of meditation, the
ripening process which the war precipitated, and which was fed from the
flame of Flaubert, Goncourt, Zola, and others. Neglecting almost entirely
those elements of his genius which came to him as his birthright, he
devotes himself henceforth to a study of the problems of life. Our
Provencal cicada has a purpose now: nothing else than the reformation of
all social abuses. He does not single out one and attack it time after
time, but he springs restlessly from one to another, directing high and
low his relentless inquiry.

"Fromont jeune et Risler aine" (1874) is the first of Daudet's great
novels and one of his strongest studies. Sidonie, the daughter of humble
bourgeois parents, is filled with a longing for luxury and social
prominence. She succeeds in becoming the wife of Fromont, a simple, honest
workman whose talent and industry have brought him wealth. Sidonie's
unscrupulousness in the pursuit of her object spreads ruin. Risler, the
partner of Fromont, withdraws large sums from the common treasury to
satisfy the extravagant desires of Sidonie whom he loves. Fromont's  eyes
are at last opened; he finds the firm, which had always been his pride, on
the verge of bankruptcy; he discovers the perfidy of Sidonie and attempts
to force her to beg on her knees the forgiveness of Risler's
long-suffering wife. Sidonie flees and becomes a concert-hall singer. Her
revenge is complete when by means of a letter she proves to Fromont that
she has corrupted his much-loved younger brother. Fromont hangs himself.

Outside the main current of the plot Daudet sketches one of the little
dramas of humble life of which he was so fond: the story of Delobelle, an
impoverished actor who lives for his art while his devoted wife and
daughter Desiree patiently ply the needle to earn bread.

Daudet up to this time had been recognized as the greatest of French
short-story writers. The success of "Fromont jeune et Risler aine" was
immediate, and in his succeeding novels he confirmed more and more surely
his right to a place in the front rank of French novelists.

From this story of the life of the _petite bourgeoisie_ he turns to a
wider field. The Bohemia of Paris, a glimpse of the country, and
especially the life of the artisan, fill "Jack" (1876). Daudet had known
the real Jack at Champrosay in 1868. In the novel Jack is the illegitimate
son of Ida de Barency, a shallow demi-mondaine who is passionately devoted
to the boy but brings to him nothing but misfortune. Jack begins his
suffering in a wretched school where his mother has placed him after the
Jesuits had refused to receive him. This school is supported by the
tuition fees of boys from tropical countries, _petits pays chauds_, as
Moronval, the villainous director, calls them. The teachers belong to that
class of _rates_, artistic and literary failures, whom Daudet learned to
know well during his first years in Paris. One of these _rates_ captivates
Ida de Barency, and Jack's life of misery continues. Despite his physical
unfitness, he is sent to labor in the shipbuilding yards at Indret,
suffers tortures in the stoking room of an ocean steamer, is wrecked, and
returns to France in a piteous condition. His love for Cecile,
granddaughter of a gentle country doctor, is rapidly making a man of him,
when his mother enters again into his life and the poor boy dies miserably
in a hospital, killed by despair rather than by disease.

This is perhaps the most powerful of Daudet's novels; it is certainly the
most harrowing. The tragedy of the whole is only slightly relieved by the
interweaving of the romance of good Belisaire, the hawker, one of Jack's
few friends.

"Le Nabab" (1878) is concerned with politics, the richer bourgeoisie, and
the aristocracy. Jansoulet, the "nabob," returns from Tunis with a large
fortune and immediately becomes the prey of parasites. He is made the
enemy of the banker Hemerlingue through the social rivalry of their wives.
He is elected _depute_ from Corsica. The legality of the election is
questioned. Jansoulet is supported by the prime minister, the duc de Mora,
but the latter dies suddenly, Jansoulet's election is declared invalid,
and he dies from a stroke of apoplexy.

Despite the protest of the author, contemporaries found originals for a
number of the characters of this novel. The duc de Mora is Morny, and
several others have been identified with greater or less certainty.
Felicia Ruys is perhaps Sarah Bernhardt.

The purely romantic element of the work is found in the story of Paul de
Gery and the Joyeuse family, a secondary plot having no vital connection
with the main story.

In "Les Rois en exil" (1880) Daudet explores a new vein in contemporary
society. He explains that the idea of the work occured to him one October
evening when, standing in the Place du Carrousel, he was contemplating the
ruins of the Tuileries. The wreck of the Empire brought to his mind a
vision of the dethroned monarchs whom he had seen spending their exile in
Paris: the Duke of Brunswick, the blind King of Hanover and the devoted
Princess Frederica, Queen Isabella of Spain, and others. "This is the work
which cost me most effort," Daudet says, and the reason is not far to
seek. He had always painted "from life," and the difficulties incident to
gaining an entrance into the intimacy of even dethroned monarchs were
almost insurmountable. The novelist's acquaintances were appealed to, from
house-furnishers to diplomats. The story of the composition of "Les Rois
en exil" is an interesting study of Daudet's methods, his inexorable
insistence on truth, even to the most minute details.

As usual, the characters are sharply contrasted. Christian, the exiled
king of Illyria, is detestably weak; Frederique, his wife devoting herself
completely to the interests of her son, Zara, struggles with the aid of
the faithful preceptor, Meraut, to prepare the prince for a throne which
he is never to ascend. Of all the characters that appear in Daudet's
novels it is perhaps Frederique whose appeal to the reader is strongest,
and Frederique is almost entirely the product of the author's imagination.
We cannot but regret the many visions such as Frederique which were
refused admittance to Daudet's essentially romantic mind by the
uncompromising laws of a realism which he had mistakenly accepted as his
guide.

The composition of "Les Rois en exil" is defective, but its charm is
great. In "Numa Roumestan" (1881) the technique is better. Daudet's first
intention was to entitle this work "Nord et midi," his idea being to
contrast the north with the south, a theme for which he always had a
predilection. Numa is a refined Tartarin; Daudet sends him to Paris, and
studies the result. Numa carries all before him by his robust vigor and
geniality. The "mirage" effects of the southern sun pursue him to Paris;
quick to promise out of the fullness of his hearty enthusiasm, he
encourages and disappoints those who trust themselves to him. He deceives
his wife, begs her forgiveness with abundant tears, and in a disgusting
manner deceives her a second time. The book ends with the picture of
Rosalie Roumestan bending over her new-born son. "Will you be a liar too?"
She asks. "Will you be a Roumestan, tell me?"

"L'Evangeliste" (1883), a psychological study rather than a novel, is a
heartbreaking picture of the inhumanity of religious fanaticism. "Sapho"
(1884) is so essentially French in spirit that it can hardly be understood
by American readers. Daudet dedicates it "To my sons when they are
twenty." It is intended as a lesson, and if naturalistic works ever can
carry a lesson this one certainly does. It is a striking picture of the
evils of _faux menages_. On the whole "Sapho" is disagreeable, yet of the
novels it seems to be Daudet's masterpiece, perhaps because it is the most
romantic.  The truth may be photographed in its most minute realistic
details, as in Zola, or it may be colored by poetic fancy; this has
happened in "Numa Roumestan" and especially in "Sapho," the two novels of
Daudet which appear most likely to live. In "Sapho" there is a tender note
which is lacking in "Jack" and in "Fromont jeune et Risler aine"; Daudet's
nature fitted him to inspire pity rather than indignation. And we must
remember that while writing "Sapho" he had in mind the future of his own
sons. He looks forward, and in hope of a fortunate issue tells frankly, in
a kindly manner, a true story  which he hopes may be fruitful of good
results. If, instead of assuming the role of inquisitorial censor,
naturalists would show sympathy for erring mankind, if they would look
forward with hope instead of fixing their horrified eyes on the present or
the past, their judgments would not tend to make us give up in despair,
but might encourage and instruct. "Sapho" is the last of the great novels.

"L'Immortel" (1888) is a weak and unjust satire directed against the
French Academy. "Rose et Ninette" (1892) is a study of the evils of
divorce; "La Petite Paroisse" (1895), the only one of the novels with a
happy outcome, is a study of jealousy.  In "Soutien de famille" (1898,
posthumous) two brothers are contrasted; the older, as a matter of course
recognized as the head of the family, is weak, and the younger is the real
"prop of the family."

Just after "Sapho" (1884) Daudet's health had begun to decline. Long years
of suffering follow, but, although in almost constant pain, the
indefatigable worker remains at his desk.

In "Souvenirs d'un homme de lettres" (1888) and "Trente Ans de Paris"
(1888) Daudet tells the story of his life and literary activity. It is
through these works that we become intimately acquainted with our author,
and we are not disillusioned. "Entre les frises et la rampe" (1893)
contains studies of the stage and its people.


       *       *       *       *       *


Daudet claimed to be an independent,[1] and was indignant when an attempt
was made to class him with any school. He was certainly independent in his
youth, but in his second period, after the war, he became a realist with
Flaubert and Zola and an impressionist with Goncourt.

[Footnote 1: He consistently refused to have his name placed in candidacy
before the Academy. In a foreword prefixed to "L'Immortel" he declares:
"Je ne me presente pas, je ne me suis jamais presente, je ne me
presenterai jamais a l'Academie."]

It is, however, the southerner in Daudet that remains most pleasing. It is
in those works which are directly inspired by his native land of dreams
that he is most completely himself, and therefore most charming. It is
here that he discloses his kinship with Musset. With all the delicacy of
Musset and at the same time a saneness which Musset did not always
possess, what might he not have accomplished if he had only continued as
he began? Even as it is, the best Daudet is the young Daudet, the brother
of Musset. In his so-called great works, the long novels where questions
of the day are fearlessly treated yet never solved, the works which are
frequently considered his surest claim to immortality, we have an entirely
different Daudet, excellent of course, and strong too if you like, but not
the Daudet that nature had intended to produce.

Surely it would have been better if he had never gone to Paris, but, like
his friend Mistral, had remained in Provence and devoted his essentially
poetic genius to an expression of the spirit of the south. His keenly
sensitive nature was too delicate for intercourse with the virility of a
Zola or the subtlety of a Goncourt. Paris made of him a realist, and the
world lost by the transformation.

Daudet's love for his native land was intense. Its images were ever
present to him; its poetry haunted him throughout his life. He urged young
men ambitious of literary laurels to remain in their native provinces, to
draw their inspiration from the soil, confident that something great and
beautiful would result. Why did he not take for himself the counsel he so
incessantly offered to others? An untiring curiosity which accompanied a
remarkable acuteness of all the senses, and an emotional and intellectual
receptivity which rendered him quickly and profoundly  impressionable,
equipped Daudet to express the poetic spirit of the south in its epic as
well as its lyric qualities. He was aware of this himself. "I believe that
I shall carry away with me," he said, "many curious observations on my
race, its virtues, its faults".[1] And in speaking of the "Lettres de mon
moulin," the only volume of his works in which his southern nature is
given free rein, he says many years after its publication, after he had
written his best novels, "That is still my favorite book."

[Footnote 1: Leon Daudet, "Alphonse Daudet," p. 183; read the whole
chapter. "En lisant Eugenie de Guerin, je m'ecrie: 'Pourquoi n'avoir pas
tous vecu chez nous, dans nos coins?' Comme nos esprits y auraient gagne
au point de vue de l'originalite au sens etymologique du mot, c'est-a-dire
vertu d'origine."--"Notes sur la vie," p. 141.]

Daudet's remarkable power of observation was innate. From his youth he
exercised this instinct and carried a notebook in which he set down
impressions, studies, and sketches of characters  and scenes. These
notebooks proved to be of inestimable value to the realist; and the
natural inclination to seek the naked truth, to which they bear witness,
strengthened the determination of the postbellum Daudet to enter the ranks
of the sociological novelists. So far as possible, he borrowed every
detail of character and environment from real life; almost all his
characters represent real persons whom he studied with a view of using
them in his books. Daudet's is a microscopic, notebook realism quite
different from the universal verity of Balzac, but there are many pages
prompted by an exquisite sympathy or a violent passion in which the
indomitable personality of the author breaks through the impassiveness
imposed by the accepted masters of the craft. Sadness is the prevailing
tone in his work, the sort of sadness that proceeds from pity. Where
sadness does not dominate in Daudet, irony takes its place. These two
qualities, sadness which is inspired by pity for human suffering and irony
which betrays impatience with human folly, these two qualities which are
the heart and soul of Daudet's work are the enemies of that impassiveness
which is the indispensable attitude of the realist, and which Daudet tried
in vain to acquire.

Paris, the war, his intercourse with Flaubert and Goncourt and Zola, were
the influences, then, that transformed Daudet, most easily susceptible to
impressions from without. The Daudet of the great novels is not the real
Daudet, however; the real Daudet is the author of "Les Amoureuses," of the
"Lettres de mon moulin," and of "Tartarin de Tarascon."

But even in the "Tartarin" series he is not entirely himself. The pure
stream of his native simplicity and naivete is already  tinged with the
worldly-wiseness of the Parisian. In the "Lettres de mon moulin" the
writer is still in sympathy with his native land, while in the earliest of
the "Tartarin" series, "Tartarin de Tarascon," there is already a spirit
of disdainful raillery which Daudet learned in Paris. Tarascon was piqued
when "Tartarin de Tarascon" appeared. Indeed, there is more than a little
in the book that may well offend local pride.

In "Numa Roumestan" the satire is still less sympathetic and less
good-natured. Numa is utterly detestable. He is a visionary; we readily
forgive such a weakness, and we are amused by this characteristic trait of
the south in Bompard and Tartarin. These two are visionaries and liars;
they are cowards too, boastful and conceited. But they have never had the
happiness of others in their hands. If a true child of the south, such as
Tartarin or Bompard, were placed in a position of trust, he would not
prove equal to the occasion and the result would be a Numa Roumestan. That
is Daudet's verdict, and certainly his decision is not flattering to the
south. Is this the decision of the better Daudet? is it not a Parisian
Daudet, whose sympathy for his native land has been warped by the play of
Parisian mockery on his sensitive, easily convinced nature?

It is precisely in "Numa Roumestan," where he is making his most complete
study of the character of the southerner, that Daudet is most pessimistic.
Le Quesnoy, the worthy northerner, deceives his wife as does Numa, the
lying southerner. The spirit of the novel is epitomized in such sentiments
as "Joie de rue, douleur de maison," "Au nord au midi--tous pareils,
traitres et parjures," "Grand homme pour tout le monde excepte pour sa
femme." A decided pessimism pervades the great novels. Optimistic  Daudet
is frequently said to be. He was truly so by nature, he is so in the
"Lettres de mon moulin" and in all his work before the war, but his
pessimism is unquestionable in the great novels.

Surely nature did not intend Daudet to become a pessimist; he loved
mankind, he had many devoted friends and no enemies. He carried happiness
wherever he went. The attic of Auteuil, the rendezvous of the Goncourt
group, is dark and gloomy. A serious, mirthless band surrounds the
armchair of the patriarch. The door opens and Daudet enters. Old Goncourt
rises to greet him: "Eh bien! mon petit, ca va?" "Assez bien, mon
Goncourt" is the reply. The terrible malady has already seized the younger
man, but he still radiates life and cheer: his lightness of heart dispels
the gravity of the company; little by little his animation is communicated
to them all, and the attic resounds with peals of laughter.

It was always so. The sympathy of Daudet, the man, was unfailing; his pity
For the weak, his love for his family and friends, his hatred of villainy,
were boundless. He delighted in little acts of charity the source of which
remained unknown to the world and even to the recipient.

"My father said to me again and again," Leon Daudet tells us, "I should
like, after I have accomplished my task, to set myself up as a merchant of
happiness. My reward would be in my success!" This longing, so entirely
characteristic of the man, is manifest everywhere in his earlier work,
only rarely in the great novels; unfortunately the great novels were his
"task."

If only he had continued as he began, if only he had remained the poet of
the "Lettres de mon moulin"; if only he had not been led astray by his
"task," he might have brought to the world of readers that happiness which
he brought to his few friends in the attic of Auteuil.


       *       *       *       *       *


We are told the story of the publication of "Tartarin de Tarascon" [1] by
Daudet himself in his "Trente Ans de Paris." It began to appear in the
_Petit Moniteur universel_, but did not appeal to the readers of this
popular newspaper.

[Footnote 1: The other books of the "Tartarin" series are inferior to
"Tartarin de Tarascon" (1872). "Tartarin sur les Alpes" (1885) relates the
adventures of the hero while climbing the great mountains of Switzerland
in order to prove that he is worthy of remaming P.C.A. (_President du Club
Alpin de Tarascon._) In "La Defense de Tarascon" (1886, only a dozen pages
long) we have a characteristic picture of the city preparing to resist the
German invasion. "Port-Tarascon" (1890) is the last and poorest of the
series. Tartarin leads his compatriots in a colonizing expedition to the
South Seas, and then brings them home again. Finally, in self-inflicted
exile, "across the bridge" in Beaucaire (cf. note to _13_ 28), the great
man dies.]

Publication was interrupted after some ten installments, and the work was
carried to the _Figaro_, by whose more aristocratic clientele literary
irony was not unappreciated. The hero was first called _Chapatin_, then
_Barbarin_ (cf. note to _56_ 12), and finally _Tartarin_. "Tartarin de
Tarascon" is a _galejado, une plaisanterie, un eclat de rire_. Continuing
Daudet says: "Only one who was raised in southern France, or knows it
thoroughly, can appreciate how frequently the Tartarin type is to be met
there, and how under the generous sun of Tarascon, which warms and
electrifies, the natural drollery of mind and imagination is led astray
into monstrous exaggerations, in form and dimension as various as bottle
gourds."

Daudet, like our Dickens, succeeded in producing characters invested with
such reality that in the minds of readers they become veritable beings. Of
all his creations Tartarin is the most widely known, and the world's
conception of a French southerner is derived from the portrait of this
hero.

As is usual in the works of Daudet, the character of Tartarin is not
wholly fictitious. The home of the cap-hunters was really not Tarascon,
but a village five or six leagues away on the other side of the Rhone. It
was from this village, and in company with the prototype of Tartarin, that
Daudet set out for Africa in 1861, chiefly to recover his health and
incidentally to hunt lions. The novel is a souvenir of the author's
sojourn in the home of the real Tartarin and of the trip which the two
made together[1], the whole being greatly modified by the play of the
novelist's Provencal imagination.

[Footnote 1: See the following notes of this edition for evidence of the
extent to which Daudet used the notes jotted down in Africa in the
composition of "Tartarin": _70_ 21, _73_ 27, _81_ 5-6. See also "Souvenirs
d'un homme de lettres," p. 44, where he speaks of the notebook from which
he extracted "Tartarin" and other works.]

To appreciate "Tartarin de Tarascon" is not easy for a foreigner; and by
foreigners is meant all those who have not lived in and do not know
Provence. Americans and Parisians (see pages 16-17) look on Tartarin and
his compatriots as mere liars.

They are not liars: they are suffering simply from the effects of a
mirage. To understand what is meant by a mirage, you must go to the south
of France. There you will find a magic sun which transforms everything,
which takes a molehill and makes of it a mountain. Go to Tarascon, seek
out a man who almost went to Shanghai, look steadfastly at him, and if the
southern sun is shining upon him you will soon be convinced that he has
actually gone to Shanghai.

In reading "Tartarin de Tarascon," therefore, remember that Tartarin's
world is small and his imagination large; that he never lies, though he
rarely tells the truth. Do not make the mistake of thinking Tartarin a
lunatic. Just as his immortal predecessor Don Quixote was thoroughly sane
except in that which touched the realm of chivalry, so Tartarin is a
normal Frenchman except when he is under the influence of the southern
mirage.


       *       *       *       *       *


Daudet says in "Trente Ans de Paris," page 142, that the home of the real
Tartarin was five or six miles from Tarascon on the other side of the
Rhone. In an article which appeared in "Les Annales," July 6, 1913,
Charles Le Goffic tells of a visit to the house in Tarascon known as _la
maison de Tartarin_, and reports a conversation he had with Mistral, the
great Provencal poet, an intimate friend of Daudet. Mistral said that the
real Tartarin lived at Nimes, eighteen miles from Tarascon, to the west of
the Rhone, and was no other than Raynaud, Daudet's own cousin. "Raynaud,"
Mistral told Le Goffic, "had travelled among the _Teurs_ and talked about
nothing but his lion hunts; he talked about them with his lower lip
extended so as to form a terrible pout (_moue_), which gave a character of
good-natured ferocity to the little gentleman's honest face.
Raynaud recognized himself in Tartarin and became very angry with Daudet;
the reconciliation between the cousins was not effected till toward the
end of the novelist's life."




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


A definitive edition of the works of Daudet has been published by
Houssiaux, in octavo, 1899 ff. (18 volumes). Convenient editions of most
of them are published by Flammarion, Lemerre, Fasquelle, and others.

The best sources for the study of Daudet's life and works are his _Trente
Ans de Paris, Souvenirs d'un homme de lettres, Notes sur la vie_ (Paris,
1899), his brother Ernest's _Mon Frere et moi_ (Paris, 1882), and his son
Leon's _Alphonse Daudet_ (Paris, 1898).

The following may also be consulted:

J. BRIVOIS, _Essai de bibliographie des oeuvres de M. Alphonse Daudet_,
Paris, 1895.
H. CEARD, introduction to the definitive edition.
B. DIEDERICH, _Alphonse Daudet_, Berlin, 1900.
R. DOUMIC, in _Portraits d'ecrivains_ and _Etudes sur la litterature
francaise_, Vol. III.
HENRY JAMES, in _Partial Portraits_.
J. LEMAITRE, in _Les Contemporains_, Vol. II.
R. H. SHERARD, _Alphonse Daudet_, London, 1894.
B. W. WELLS, in _A Century of French Fiction_, New York, 1903.
E. ZOLA, in _Les Romanciers naturalistes_.

The illustrations in the following articles are of interest:

J. A. HAMMERTON, "The Town of Tartarin," in _The Critic_, vol. 47, pp 317
ff.
A. B. MAURICE, "The Trail of Tartarin," in _The Bookman_, vol. 14, pp. 128
ff.; vol. 15, pp. 520 ff.


WORKS OF ALPHONSE DAUDET

POEMS, NOVELS, TALES, AND SKETCHES

Les Amoureuses, poemes et fantaisies (including La Double Conversion, Le
Roman
du Chaperon rouge, and other poems) 1857-1861.
Le Petit Chose, 1868.
Lettres de mon moulin, 1869.
Lettres a un absent, 1871.
Aventures prodigieuses de Tartarin de Tarascon, 1872.
Contes du lundi, 1873.
Les Femmes d'artistes, premiere serie (not continued), 1874.
Fromont jeune et Risler aine, 1874.
Robert Helmont, 1874.
Jack, 1876.
Le Nabab, 1877.
Les Rois en exil, 1879.
Numa Roumestan, 1881.
L'Evangeliste, 1883.
Sapho, 1884.
Tartarin sur les Alpes, 1885.
La Belle Nivernaise, 1886.
La Defense de Tarascon, 1886.
Trente Ans de Paris, 1888.
L'Immortel, 1888.
Souvenirs d'un homme de lettres, 1888.
Port Tarascon, 1890.
Rose et Ninette, 1892.
Entre les frises et la rampe, 1894.
La Petite Paroisse, 1895.
La Fedor, 1897.
Le Tresor d'Arlatan, 1897.
Soutien de famille, 1898.
Notes sur la vie, publie par Mme A. Daudet, 1899.

PLAYS

La Derniere Idole, 1862 (with E. L'Epine).
Les Absents, 1864.
L'oeillet blanc, 1865 (with E. Manuel).
Le Frere aine, 1867 (with E. Manuel).
Le Sacrifice, 1869.
Lise Tavernier, 1872.
L'Arlesienne, 1872.
Fromont jeune et Risler aine, 1876 (with A. Belot).
Le Char, 1878 (with P. Arene).
Le Nabab, 1880 (with P. Elzear).
Jack, 1881 (with H. Lafontaine).
Sapho, 1885 (with A. Belot).
Numa Roumestan, 1887.
La Lutte pour la vie, 1889 (taken from "L'Immortel").
l'Obstacle, 1890.
La Menteuse, 1892 (with L. Hennique).





A MON AMI
GONZAGUE PRIVAT



NOTE: Although the whole book is a single page, the original page numbers
have been retained, as well as the line numbers, for reference to the NOTE
sections at the end of this book. The HTML version of this book allows you
to travel back and forth between the text and the notes, through the use
of dynamic links. For students who want to make a serious dissection of
the book, the HTML version will probably be more convenient. For the
readers who simply want to enjoy reading the text, we hope that the
numbers will be no more than a minor annoyance.

Renald Levesque, for DISTRIBUTED PROOFREADERS AND GUTENBERG PROJECT.






TARTARIN DE TARASCON


_En France tout le monde
est un peu de Tarascon_.



PREMIER EPISODE



A TARASCON

I

Le jardin du baobab.


Page 1

Ma premiere visite a Tartarin de Tarascon est restee dans
ma vie comme une date inoubliable; il y a douze ou quinze ans
de cela, mais je m'en souviens mieux que d'hier. L'intrepide
Tartarin habitait alors, a l'entree de la ville, la troisieme maison
[5]a main gauche sur le chemin d'Avignon. Jolie petite villa tarasconnaise
avec jardin devant, balcon derriere, des murs tres
blancs, des persiennes vertes, et sur le pas de la porte une
nichee de petits Savoyards jouant a la marelle ou dormant au
bon soleil, la tete sur leurs boites a cirage.

[10]Du dehors, la maison n'avait l'air de rien.

Jamais on ne se serait cru devant la demeure d'un heros.
Mais quand on entrait, coquin de sort!...

De la cave au grenier, tout le batiment avait l'air heroique,
meme le jardin!...

[15]O le jardin de Tartarin, il n'y en avait pas deux comme celui-la en
Europe. Pas un arbre du pays, pas une fleur de France;
rien que des plantes exotiques, des gommiers, des calebassiers,
des cotonniers, des cocotiers, des manguiers, des bananiers, des

Page 2.

palmiers, un baobab, des nopals, des cactus, des figuiers de
Barbarie, a se croire en pleine Afrique centrale, a dix mille lieues
de Tarascon. Tout cela, bien entendu, n'etait pas de grandeur
naturelle; ainsi les cocotiers n'etaient guere plus gros que des
[5]betteraves, et le baobab (_arbre geant, arbos gigantea_) tenait a
l'aise dans un pot de reseda; mais c'est egal! pour Tarascon
c'etait deja bien joli, et les personnes de la ville, admises le
dimanche a l'honneur de contempler le baobab de Tartarin, s'en
retournaient pleines d'admiration.

[10]Pensez quelle emotion je dus eprouver ce jour-la en traversant
ce jardin mirifique!... Ce fut bien autre chose quand on
m'introduisit dans le cabinet du heros.

Ce cabinet, une des curiosites de la ville, etait au fond du
jardin, ouvrant de plain-pied sur le baobab par une porte
[15]vitree.

Imaginez-vous une grande salle tapissee de fusils et de sabres,
depuis en haut jusqu'en bas; toutes les armes de tous les pays
du monde: carabines, rifles, tromblons, couteaux corses,
couteaux catalans, couteaux-revolvers, couteaux-poignards, krish
[20]malais, fleches caraibes, fleches de silex, coups-de-poing,
casse-tete, massues hottentotes, lazos mexicains, est-ce que je sais!

Par la-dessus, un grand soleil feroce qui faisait luire l'acier
des glaives et les crosses des armes a feu, comme pour vous
donner encore plus la chair de poule.... Ce qui rassurait un
[25]peu pourtant, c'etait le bon air d'ordre et de proprete qui regnait
sur toute cette yataganerie. Tout y etait range, soigne, brosse,
etiquete comme dans une pharmacie; de loin en loin, un petit
ecriteau bonhomme sur lequel on lisait:

_Fleches empoisonnees, n'y touchez pas!_

[30]Ou:

_Armes chargees, mefiez-vous!_

Sans ces ecriteaux, jamais je n'aurais ose entrer.

Page 3

Au milieu du cabinet, il y avait un gueridon. Sur le gueridon,
un flacon de rhum, une blague turque, les Voyages du capitaine
Cook, les romans de Cooper, de Gustave Aimard, des recits de
chasse a l'ours, chasse au faucon, chasse a l'elephant,
[5]Etc.... Enfin, devant le gueridon, un homme etait assis, de
quarante a quarante-cinq ans, petit, gros, trapu, rougeaud, en
bras de chemise, avec des calecons de flanelle, une forte barbe
courte et des yeux flamboyants, d'une main il tenait un livre,
de l'autre il brandissait une enorme pipe a couvercle de fer, et,
[10]tout en lisant je ne sais quel formidable recit de chasseurs de
chevelures, il faisait, en avancant sa levre inferieure, une moue
terrible, qui donnait a sa brave figure de petit rentier tarasconnais
ce meme caractere de ferocite bonasse qui regnait dans
toute la maison.

[15]Cet homme, c'etait Tartarin, Tartarin de Tarascon, l'intrepide,
le grand, l'incomparable Tartarin de Tarascon.




II

_Coup d'oeil general
jete sur la bonne ville de Tarascon;
les chasseurs de casquettes._

Au temps dont je vous parle, Tartarin de Tarascon n'etait
pas encore le Tartarin qu'il est aujourd'hui, le grand Tartarin
de Tarascon, si populaire dans tout le midi de la France. Pourtant
[20]--meme a cette epoque--c'etait deja le roi de Tarascon.

Disons d'ou lui venait cette royaute.

Vous saurez d'abord que la-bas tout le monde est chasseur,
depuis le plus grand jusqu'au plus petit. La chasse est la passion des
Tarasconnais, et cela depuis les temps mythologiques
[25]ou la Tarasque faisait les cent coups dans les marais de la ville
et ou les Tarasconnais d'alors organisaient des battues contre
elle. Il y a beau jour, comme vous voyez.

Page 4

Donc, tous les dimanches matin, Tarascon prend les armes et
sort de ses murs, le sac au dos, le fusil sur l'epaule, avec un
tremblement de chiens, de furets, de trompes, de cors de chasse.
C'est superbe a voir.... Par malheur, le gibier manque, il
[5]manque absolument.

Si betes que soient les betes, vous pensez bien qu'a la longue
elles ont fini par se mefier.

A cinq lieues autour de Tarascon, les terriers sont vides, les
nids abandonnes. Pas un merle, pas une caille, pas le moindre
[10]lapereau, pas le plus petit cul-blanc.

Elles sont cependant bien tentantes, ces jolies collinettes
tarasconnaises, toutes parfumees de myrte, de lavande, de romarin;
et ces beaux raisins muscats gonfles de sucre, qui s'echelonnent
an bord du Rhone, sont diablement appetissants aussi....
[15]Oui, mais il y a Tarascon derriere, et dans le petit monde du
poil et de la plume, Tarascon est tres mal note. Les oiseaux
de passage eux-memes l'ont marque d'une grande croix sur leurs
feuilles de route, et quand les canards sauvages, descendant vers
la Camargue en longs triangles, apercoivent de loin les clochers
[20]de la ville, celui qui est en tete se met a crier bien fort: "Voila
Tarascon!... voila Tarascon!" et toute la bande fait un
crochet.

Bref, en fait de gibier, il ne reste plus dans le pays qu'un
vieux coquin de lievre, echappe comme par miracle aux septembrisades
[25]tarasconnaises et qui s'entete a vivre la! A Tarascon,
ce lievre est tres connu. On lui a donne un nom. Il s'appelle
_le Rapide_. On sait qu'il a son gite dans la terre de M. Bompard,--ce
qui, par parenthese, a double et meme triple le prix de
cette terre,--mais on n'a pas encore pu l'atteindre.

[30]A l'heure qu'il est meme, il n'y a plus que deux ou trois
enrages qui s'acharnent apres lui.

Les autres en ont fait leur deuil, et _le Rapide_ est passe depuis
longtemps a l'etat de superstition locale, bien que le Tarasconnais

Page 5

soit tres peu superstitieux de sa nature et qu'il mange les hirondelles
en salmis, quand il en trouve.

--Ah ca! me direz-vous, puisque le gibier est si rare a Tarascon,
qu'est-ce que les chasseurs tarasconnais font donc tous les
[5]dimanches?

Ce qu'ils font?

Eh mon Dieu! ils s'en vont en pleine campagne, a deux ou
trois lieues de la ville. Ils se reunissent par petits groupes de
cinq ou six, s'allongent tranquillement a l'ombre d'un puits, d'un
[10]vieux mur, d'un olivier, tirent de leurs carniers un bon morceau
de boeuf en daube, des oignons crus, un _saucissot_, quelques
anchois, et commencent un dejeuner interminable, arrose d'un
de ces jolis vins du Rhone qui font rire et qui font chanter.

Apres quoi, quand on est bien leste, on se leve, on siffle les
[15]chiens, on arme les fusils, et on se met en chasse. C'est a dire
que chacun de ces messieurs prend sa casquette, la jette en l'air
de toutes ses forces, et la tire au vol avec du 5, du 6, ou du
2,--selon les conventions.

Celui qui met le plus souvent dans sa casquette est proclame
[20]roi de la chasse, et rentre le soir en triomphateur a Tarascon,
la casquette criblee au bout du fusil, au milieu des aboiements
et des fanfares.

Inutile de vous dire qu'il se fait dans la ville un grand commerce
de casquettes de chasse. Il y a meme des chapeliers qui
[25]vendent des casquettes trouees et dechirees d'avance a l'usage
des maladroits, mais on ne connait guere que Bezuquet, le
pharmacien, qui leur en achete. C'est deshonorant!

Comme chasseur de casquettes, Tartarin de Tarascon n'avait
pas son pareil. Tous les dimanches matin, il partait avec une
[30]casquette neuve: tous les dimanches soir, il revenait avec une
loque. Dans la petite maison du baobab, les greniers etaient
pleins de ces glorieux trophees. Aussi, tous les Tarasconnais le
reconnaissent-ils pour leur maitre, et comme Tartarin savait a

Page 6

fond le code du chasseur, qu'il avait lu tous les traites, tous les
manuels de toutes les chasses possibles, depuis la chasse a la
casquette jusqu'a la chasse au tigre birman, ces messieurs en
avaient fait leur grand justicier cynegetique et le prenaient pour
[5]arbitre dans toutes leurs discussions.

Tous les jours, de trois a quatre, chez I'armurier Costecalde
on voyait un gros homme, grave et la pipe aux dents, assis sur
un fauteuil de cuir vert, au milieu de la boutique pleine de chasseurs
de casquettes, tous debout et se chamaillant. C'etait Tartarin
[10]de Tarascon qui rendait la justice, Nemrod double de
Salomon.


III


_Nan! Nan! Nan!
Suite du coup d'oeil general jete sur la
bonne ville de Tarascon._

A la passion de la chasse, la forte race tarasconnaise joint une
autre passion: celle des romances. Ce qui se consomme de
romances dans ce petit pays, c'est a n'y pas croire. Toutes les
[15]vieilleries sentimentales qui jaunissent dans les plus vieux cartons,
on les retrouve a Tarascon en pleine jeunesse, en plein
eclat. Elles y sont toutes, toutes. Chaque famille a la sienne,
et dans la ville cela se sait. On sait, par exemple, que celle du
pharmacien Bezuquet, c'est:
[20]      Toi, blanche etoile que j'adore;
Celle de l'armurier Costecalde:
          Veux-tu venir au pays des cabanes?
Celle du receveur de l'enregistrement:
          Si j'etais-t-invisible, personne n'me verrait.
               (_Chansonnette comique_)

Page 7

Et ainsi de suite pour tout Tarascon. Deux ou trois fois par
semaine, on se reunit les uns chez les autres et on se _les_ chante.
Ce qu'il y a de singulier, c'est que ce sont toujours les memes,
et que, depuis si longtemps qu'ils se les chantent, ces braves
[5]Tarasconnais n'ont jamais envie d'en changer. On se les legue
dans les familles, de pere en fils, et personne n'y touche; c'est
sacre. Jamais meme on ne s'en emprunte. Jamais il ne viendrait
a l'idee des Costecalde de chanter celle des Bezuquet, ni
aux Bezuquet de chanter celle des Costecalde. Et pourtant
[10]vous pensez s'ils doivent les connaitre depuis quarante ans qu'ils
se les chantent. Mais non! chacun garde la sienne et tout le
monde est content.

Pour les romances comme pour les casquettes, le premier
de la ville etait encore Tartarin. Sa superiorite sur ses concitoyens
[15]consistait en ceci: Tartarin de Tarascon n'avait pas la
sienne. Il les avait toutes.

Toutes!

Seulement c'etait le diable pour les lui faire chanter. Revenu
de bonne heure des succes de salon, le heros tarasconnais aimait
[20]bien mieux se plonger dans ses livres de chasse ou passer sa
soiree au cercle que de faire le joli coeur devant un piano de
Nimes, entre deux bougies de Tarascon. Ces parades musicales
lui semblaient au-dessous de lui.... Quelquefois cependant,
quand il y avait de la musique a la pharmacie Bezuquet, il entrait
[25]comme par hasard, et apres s'etre bien fait prier, consentait
a dire le grand duo de _Robert le Diable_, avec madame
Bezuquet la mere.... Qui n'a pas entendu cela n'a jamais
rien entendu.... Pour moi, quand je vivrais cent ans, je verrais
toute ma vie le grand Tartarin s'approchant du piano d'un
[30]pas solennel, s'accoudant, faisant sa moue, et sous le reflet vert
des bocaux de la devanture, essayant de donner a sa bonne
face l'expression satanique et farouche de Robert le Diable.
A peine avait-il pris position, tout de suite le salon fremissait;

Page 8

on sentait qu'il allait se passer quelque chose de grand....
Alors, apres un silence, madame Bezuquet la mere commencait
en s'accompagnant:

          Robert, toi que j'aime
[5]       Et qui recus ma foi,
          Tu vois mon effroi (_bis_),
          Grace pour toi-meme
          Et grace pour moi.

A voix basse, elle ajoutait: "A vous, Tartarin," et Tartarin
[10]de Tarascon, le bras tendu, le poing ferme, la narine fremissante
disait par trois fois d'une voix formidable, qui roulait
comme un coup de tonnerre dans les entrailles du piano:
"Non!... non!... non!..." ce qu'en bon Meridional
il prononcait: "Nan!... nan!... nan!..." Sur quoi
[15]madame Bezuquet la mere reprenait encore une fois:

          Grace pour toi-meme
          Et grace pour moi.

--"Nan!... nan!... nan!..." hurlait Tartarin de
plus belle, et la chose en restait la.... Ce n'etait pas long,
[20]comme vous voyez: mais c'etait si bien jete, si bien mime, si
diabolique, qu'un frisson de terreur courait dans la pharmacie,
et qu'on lui faisait recommencer ses: "Nan!... nan!" quatre
et cinq fois de suite.

La-dessus Tartarin s'epongeait le front, souriait aux dames,
[25]clignait de l'oeil aux hommes, et, se retirant sur son triomphe,
s'en allait dire au cercle d'un petit air negligent: "Je viens de
chez les Bezuquet chanter le duo de _Robert le Diable!_"

Et le plus fort, c'est qu'il le croyait!...






IV

_Ils!!!_

Page 9

C'est a ces differents talents que Tartarin de Tarascon devait
sa haute situation dans la ville.

Du reste, c'est une chose positive que ce diable d'homme
avait su prendre tout le monde.

[5]A Tarascon, l'armee etait pour Tartarin. Le brave commandant
Bravida, capitaine d'habillement en retraite, disait de lui:
"C'est un lapin!" et vous pensez que le commandant s'y connaissait
en lapins, apres en avoir tant habille.

La magistrature etait pour Tartarin. Deux ou trois fois, en
[10]plein tribunal, le vieux president Ladeveze avait dit, parlant
de lui:

"C'est un caractere!"

Enfin le peuple etait pour Tartarin. Sa carrure, sa demarche,
son air, un air de bon cheval de trompette qui ne craignait pas
[15]le bruit, cette reputation de heros qui lui venait on ne sait d'ou,
quelques distributions de gros sous et de taloches aux petits
decrotteurs etales devant sa porte, en avaient fait le lord Seymour
de l'endroit, le Roi des halles tarasconnaises. Sur les quais, le dimanche
soir, quand Tartarin revenait de la chasse, la casquette
[20]an bout du canon, bien sangle dans sa veste de futaine, les
portefaix du Rhone s'inclinaient pleins de respect, et se montrant du
coin de l'oeil les biceps gigantesques qui roulaient sur ses bras,
ils se disaient tout has les uns aux autres avec admiration:

"C'est celui-la qui est fort!... Il a DOUBLES MUSCLES!"

[25]DOUBLES MUSCLES!

Il n'y a qu'a Tarascon qu'on entend de ces choses-la!

Et pourtant, en depit de tout, avec ses nombreux talents, ses
doubles muscles, la faveur populaire et l'estime si precieuse
du brave commandant Bravida, ancien capitaine d'habillement,
[30]Tartarin n'etait pas heureux; cette vie de petite ville lui pesait,

Page 10

l'etouffait. Le grand homme de Tarascon s'ennuyait a Tarascon.
Le fait est que pour une nature heroique comme la sienne, pour
une ame aventureuse et folle qui ne revait que batailles, courses
dans les pampas, grandes chasses, sables du desert, ouragans
[5]et typhons, faire tous les dimanches une battue a la casquette
et le reste du temps rendre la justice chez l'armurier Costecalde,
ce n'etait guere.... Pauvre cher grand homme! A la longue,
Il y aurait eu de quoi le faire mourir de consomption.

En vain, pour agrandir ses horizons, pour oublier un peu le
[10]cercle et la place du Marche, en vain s'entourait-il de baobabs
et autres vegetations africaines; en vain entassait-il armes sur
armes, krish malais sur krish malais; en vain se bourrait-il de
lectures romanesques, cherchant, comme l'immortel don Quichotte,
a s'arracher par la vigueur de son reve aux griffes de
[15]l'impitoyable realite.... Helas! tout ce qu'il faisait pour
apaiser sa soif d'aventures ne servait qu'a l'augmenter. La vue
de toutes ses armes l'entretenait dans un etat perpetuel de
colere et d'excitation. Ses rifles, ses fleches, ses lazos lui criaient:

"Bataille! bataille!" Dans les branches de son baobab, le vent
[20]des grands voyages soufflait et lui donnait de mauvais conseils.
Pour l'achever, Gustave Aimard et Fenimore Cooper....

Oh! par les lourdes apres-midi d'ete quand il etait seul a lire
an milieu de ses glaives, que de fois Tartarin s'est leve en
rugissant; que de fois il a jete son livre et s'est precipite sur le mur
[25]pour decrocher une panoplie!

Le pauvre homme oubliait qu'il etait chez lui a Tarascon, avec
un foulard de tete et des calecons, il mettait ses lectures en
actions, et, s'exaltant au son de sa propre voix, criait en brandissant
une hache ou un tomahawk:

[30]"Qu'ils y viennent maintenant!"

_Ils?_ Qui, _Ils?_

Tartarin ne le savait pas bien lui-meme.... _Ils!_ c'etait
tout ce qui attaque, tout ce qui combat, tout ce qui mord, tout

Page 11

ce qui griffe, tout ce qui scalpe, tout ce qui hurle, tout ce qui
rugit.... _Ils!_ c'etait I'Indien Sioux dansant autour du poteau
de guerre ou le malheureux blanc est attache.

C'etait l'ours gris des montagnes Rocheuses qui se dandine,
[5]et qui se leche avec une langue pleine de sang. C'etait encore
le Touareg du desert, le pirate malais, le bandit des Abruzzes....
_Ils_ enfin, c'etait _ils!_ ... c'est-a-dire la guerre, les voyages,
l'aventure, la gloire.

Mais, helas! I'intrepide Tarasconnais avait beau _les_ appeler,
[10]_les_ defier ... _ils_ ne venaient jamais.... Pecaire! qu'est-ce
qu'_ils_ seraient venus faire a Tarascon?

Tartarin cependant _les_ attendait toujours;--surtout le soir
en allant au cercle.


V


_Quand Tartarin allait au cercle._


Le chevalier du Temple se disposant a faire une sortie contre
[15]l'infidele qui l'assiege, le _tigre_ chinois s'equipant pour la
bataille,
le guerrier comanche entrant sur le sentier de la guerre, tout
cela n'est rien aupres de Tartarin de Tarascon s'armant de pied
en cap pour aller au cercle, a neuf heures du soir, une heure
apres les clairons de la retraite.

[20]Branle-has de combat! comme disent les matelots.

A la main gauche, Tartarin prenait un coup-de-poing a pointes
de fer, a la main droite une canne a epee; dans la poche gauche,
un casse-tete; dans la poche droite, un revolver. Sur la poitrine,
entre drap et flanelle, un krish malais. Par exemple, jamais de
[25]fleche empoisonnee; ce sont des armes trop deloyales!...

Avant de partir, dans le silence et l'ombre de son cabinet, il
s'exercait un moment, se fendait, tirait au mur, faisait jouer ses
muscles; puis, il prenait son passe-partout, et traversait le jardin,
gravement, sans se presser.--A l'anglaise, messieurs, a l'anglaise!
[30]c'est le vrai courage.--Au bout du jardin, il ouvrait la

Page 12

lourde porte de fer. Il l'ouvrait brusquement, violemment, de
facon a ce qu'elle allat battre en dehors contre la muraille....
S'_ils_ avaient ete derriere, vous pensez quelle marmelade!...
Malheureusement, _ils_ n'etaient pas derriere.

[5]La porte ouverte, Tartarin sortait, jetait vite un coup d'oeil de
droite et de gauche, fermait la porte a double tour et vivement.
Puis en route.

Sur le chemin d'Avignon, pas un chat. Portes closes, fenetres eteintes.
Tout etait noir. De loin en loin un reverbere,
[10]clignotant dans le brouillard du Rhone....

Superbe et calme, Tartarin de Tarascon s'en allait ainsi dans
la nuit, faisant sonner ses talons en mesure, et du bout ferre de
sa canne arrachant des etincelles aux paves.... Boulevards,
grandes rues ou ruelles, il avait soin de tenir toujours le milieu
[15]de la chaussee, excellente mesure de precaution qui vous permet
de voir venir le danger, et surtout d'eviter ce qui, le soir, dans
les rues de Tarascon, tombe quelquefois des fenetres. A lui voir
tant de prudence, n'allez pas croire au moins que Tartarin eut
peur.... Non! seulement il se gardait.

[20]La meilleure preuve que Tartarin n'avait pas peur, c'est qu'au
lieu d'aller au cercle par le cours, il y allait par la ville,
c'est-a-dire, par le plus long, par le plus noir, par un tas de vilaines
petites rues au bout desquelles on voit le Rhone luire sinistrement.
Le pauvre homme esperait toujours qu'au detour d'un de ces
[25]coupe-gorge _ils_ allaient s'elancer de I'ombre et lui tomber sur le
dos. _Ils_ auraient ete bien recus, je vous en reponds.... Mais,
helas! par une derision du destin, jamais, au grand jamais,
Tartarin de Tarascon n'eut la chance de faire une mauvaise
rencontre. Pas meme un chien, pas meme un ivrogne. Rien!

[30]Parfois cependant une fausse alerte. Un bruit de pas, des voix
Etouffees.... "Attention!" se disait Tartarin, et il restait plante
sur place, scrutant I'ombre, prenant le vent, appuyant son oreille
contre terre a la mode indienne.... Les pas approchaient.

Page 13

Les voix devenaient distinctes.... Plus de doutes! _Ils_ arrivaient....
_Ils_ etaient la.  Deja Tartarin, l'oeil en feu, la poitrine
haletante, se ramassait sur lui-meme comme un jaguar, et
se preparait a bondir en poussant son cri de guerre ... quand
[5]tout a coup, du sein de l'ombre, il entendait de bonnes voix
tarasconnaises l'appeler bien tranquillement:

"Te! ve! ... c'est Tartarin.... Et adieu, Tartarin!"

Malediction! c'etait le pharmacien Bezuquet avec sa famille
qui venait de chanter _la sienne_ chez les Costecalde.--"Bonsoir!
[10]bonsoir!" grommelait Tartarin, furieux de sa meprise, et,
farouche, la canne haute, il s'enfoncait dans la nuit.

Arrive dans la rue du cercle, l'intrepide Tarasconnais attendait
encore un moment en se promenant de long en large devant
la porte avant d'entrer.... A la fin, las de _les_ attendre et certain
[15]qu'_ils_ ne se montreraient pas, il jetait un dernier regard de
defi dans l'ombre, et murmurait avec colere:
"Rien!... rien!... jamais rien!"

La-dessus le brave homme entrait faire son besigue avec le
commandant.


VI


_Les deux Tartarins_.


[20]Avec cette rage d'aventures, ce besoin d'emotions fortes, cette
folie de voyages, de courses, de diable au vert, comment diantre
se trouvait-il que Tartarin de Tarascon n'eut jamais quitte
Tarascon?

Car c'est un fait. Jusqu'a l'age de quarante-cinq ans, l'intrepide
[25]Tarasconnais n'avait pas une fois couche hors de sa ville.
Il n'avait pas meme fait ce fameux voyage a Marseille, que tout
bon Provencal se paie a sa majorite. C'est au plus s'il connaissait
Beaucaire, et cependant Beaucaire n'est pas bien loin de
Tarascon, puisqu'il n'y a que le pont a traverser Malheureusement
[30]ce diable de pont a ete si souvent emporte par les coups

Page 14

de vent, il est si long, si frele, et le Rhone a tant de largeur a
cet endroit que, ma foi! vous comprenez.... Tartarin de
Tarascon preferait la terre ferme.

C'est qu'il faut bien vous l'avouer, il y avait dans notre heros
[5]deux natures tres distinctes. "Je sens deux hommes en moi",
a dit je ne sais quel Pere de l'Eglise. Il l'eut dit vrai de Tartarin
qui portait en lui l'ame de don Quichotte, les memes elans
chevaleresques, le meme ideal heroique, la meme folie du romanesque
et du grandiose; mais malheureusement n'avait pas le
[10]corps du celebre hidalgo, ce corps osseux et maigre, ce pretexte
de corps, sur lequel la vie materielle manquait de prise, capable
de passer vingt nuits sans deboucler sa cuirasse et quarante-huit
heures avec une poignee de riz.... Le corps de Tartarin, au
contraire, etait un brave homme de corps, tres gras, tres lourd,
[15]tres sensuel, tres douillet, tres geignard, plein d'appetits bourgeois
et d'exigences domestiques, le corps ventru et court sur
pattes de l'immortel Sancho Panca.

Don Quichotte et Sancho Panca dans le meme homme! vous
comprenez quel mauvais menage ils y devaient faire! quels combats!
[20]quels dechirements!... O le beau dialogue a ecrire
pour Lucien ou pour Saint-Evremond, un dialogue entre les
deux Tartarins, le Tartarin-Quichotte et le Tartarin-Sancho!
Tartarin-Quichotte s'exaltant aux recits de Gustave Aimard et
criant: "Je pars!"

[25]Tartarin-Sancho ne pensant qu'aux rhumatismes et disant:
"Je reste."

TARTARIN-QUICHOTTE, tres exalte:
Couvre-toi de gloire, Tartarin.

TARTARIN-SANCHO, tres calme:
[30]Tartarin, couvre-toi de flanelle.

TARTARIN-QUICHOTTE, de plus en plus exalte:
O les bons rifles a deux coups! o les dagues, les lazos, les
mocassins!

Page 15

TARTARIN-SANCHO, de plus en plus calme:
O les bons gilets tricotes! les bonnes genouilleres bien
chaudes! o les braves casquettes a oreillettes!

TARTARIN-QUICHOTTE, hors de lui:
[5]Une hache! qu'on me donne une hache!

TARTARIN-SANCHO, sonnant la bonne:
Jeannette, mon chocolat.

La-dessus Jeannette apparait avec un excellent chocolat, chaud,
moire, parfume, et de succulentes grillades a l'anis, qui font rire
[10]Tartarin-Sancho en etouffant les cris de Tartarin-Quichotte.

Et voila comme il se trouvait que Tartarin de Tarascon
n'eut jamais quitte Tarascon.


VII


_Les Europeens a Shang-Hai.
Le Haut Commerce. Les Tartares.
Tartarin de Tarascon serait-il un imposteur?
Le mirage._


Une fois cependant Tartarin avait failli partir, partir pour
un grand voyage.

[15]Les trois freres Garcio-Camus, des Tarasconnais etablis a
Shang-Hai, lui avaient offert la direction d'un de leurs comptoirs
la-bas. Ca, par exemple, c'etait bien la vie qu'il lui fallait. Des
affaires considerables, tout un monde de commis a gouverner,
des relations avec la Russie, la Perse, la Turquie d'Asie, enfin
[20]le Haut Commerce.

Dans la bouche de Tartarin, ce mot de Haut Commerce vous
apparaissait d'une hauteur!...

La maison de Garcio-Camus avait en outre cet avantage
qu'on y recevait quelquefois la visite des Tartares. Alors vite
[25]on fermait les portes. Tous les commis prenaient les armes, on

Page 16

hissait le drapeau consulaire, et pan! pan! par les fenetres sur
les Tartares.

Avec quel enthousiasme Tartarin-Quichotte sauta sur cette
proposition, je n'ai pas besoin de vous le dire; par malheur
[5]Tartarin Sancho n'entendait pas de cette oreille la, et, comme il
etait le plus fort, l'affaire ne put pas s'arranger. Dans la ville
on en parla beaucoup. Partira-t-il? ne partira-t-il pas? Parions
que si, parions que non. Ce fut un evenement.... En fin de
compte, Tartarin ne partit pas, mais toutefois cette histoire lui
[10]fit beaucoup d'honneur. Avoir failli aller a Shang-Hai ou y etre
alle, pour Tarascon, c'etait tout comme. A force de parler du
voyage de Tartarin, on finit par croire qu'il en revenait, et le
soir, au cercle, tous ces messieurs lui demandaient des renseignements
sur la vie a Shang-Hai, sur les moeurs, le climat, l'opium,
[15]le Haut Commerce.

Tartarin, tres bien renseigne, donnait de bonne grace les
details qu'on voulait, et, a la longue, le brave homme n'etait pas
bien sur lui meme de n'etre pas alle a Shang-Hai, si bien qu'en
racontant pour la centieme fois la descente des Tartares, il en
[20]arrivait a dire tres naturellement "Alors, je fais armer mes
commis, je hisse le pavillon consulaire, et pan! pan! par les
fenetres, sur les tartares." En entendant cela, tout le cercle
fremissait....

--Mais alors, votre Tartarin n'etait qu'un affreux menteur.

[25]--Non! mille fois non! Tartarin n'etait pas un menteur....

--Pourtant, il devait bien savoir qu'il n'etait pas alle a
Shang-Hai!

--Eh! sans doute, il le savait. Seulement....

Seulement, ecoutez bien ceci. Il est temps de s'entendre une
[30]fois pour toutes sur cette reputation de menteurs que les gens
du Nord ont faite aux Meridionaux. Il n'y a pas de menteurs
dans le Midi, pas plus a Marseille qu'a Nimes, qu'a Toulouse
qu'a Tarascon. L'homme du Midi ne ment pas, il se trompe.

Page 17

Il ne dit pas toujours la verite, mais il croit la dire.... Son
mensonge a lui, ce n'est pas du mensonge, c'est une espece de
mirage....
Oui, du mirage!... Et pour bien me comprendre, allez-vous-en
[5]dans le Midi, et vous verrez. Vous verrez ce diable de pays ou
le soleil transfigure tout, et fait tout plus grand que nature. Vous
verrez ces petites collines de Provence pas plus hautes que la
butte Montmartre et qui vous paraitront gigantesques, vous
verrez la Maison carree de Nimes,--un petit bijou d'etagere,
[10]--qui vous semblera aussi grande que Notre-Dame. Vous verrez.
Ah! le seul menteur du Midi, s'il y en a un, c'est le
Soleil.... Tout ce qu'il touche, il l'exagere!... Qu'est-ce que
c'etait que Sparte aux temps de sa splendeur? Une bourgade.
Qu'est ce que c'etait qu'Athenes? Tout au plus une
[15]sous-prefecture ... et pourtant dans l'histoire elles nous apparaissent
comme des villes enormes. Voila ce que le soleil en
a fait....

Vous etonnerez-vous apres cela que le meme soleil, tombant
sur Tarascon, ait pu faire d'un ancien capitaine d'habillement
[20]comme Bravida, le brave commandant Bravida, d'un navet un
baobab, et d'un homme qui avait failli aller a Shang-Hai un
homme qui y etait alle?


VIII


_La menagerie Mitaine.
Un lion de l'Atlas a Tarascon.
Terrible et solennelle entrevue_.


Et maintenant que nous avons montre Tartarin de Tarascon
comme il etait en son prive, avant que la gloire l'eut baise au
[25]front et coiffe du laurier seculaire, maintenant que nous avons
raconte cette vie heroique dans un milieu modeste, ses joies, ses
douleurs, ses reves, ses esperances, hatons-nous d'arriver aux

Page 18

grandes pages de son histoire et au singulier evenement qui
devait donner l'essor a cette incomparable destinee.

C'etait un soir, chez l'armurier Costecalde. Tartarin de
Tarascon etait en train de demontrer a quelques amateurs le
[5]maniement du fusil a aiguille, alors dans toute sa nouveaute....
Soudain la porte s'ouvre, et un chasseur de casquettes se precipite
effare dans la boutique, en criant: "Un lion!... un
lion!..." Stupeur generale, effroi, tumulte, bousculade. Tartarin
croise la baionnette, Costecalde court fermer la porte. On
[10]entoure le chasseur, on l'interroge, on le presse, et voici ce
qu'on apprend: la menagerie Mitaine, revenant de la foire de
Beaucaire, avait consenti a faire une halte de quelques jours a
Tarascon et venait de s'installer sur la place du chateau avec un
tas de boas, de phoques, de crocodiles et un magnifique lion
[15]de l'Atlas.

Un lion de l'Atlas a Tarascon! Jamais, de memoire d'homme,
pareille chose ne s'etait vue. Aussi comme nos braves chasseurs
de casquettes se regardaient fierement! quel rayonnement sur
leurs males visages, et, dans tous les coins de la boutique Costecalde,
[20]quelles bonnes poignees de mains silencieusement echangees!
L'emotion etait si grande, si imprevue, que personne ne
trouvait un mot a dire....

Pas meme Tartarin. Pale et fremissant, le fusil a aiguille
encore entre les mains, il songeait debout devant le comptoir....

[25]Un lion de l'Atlas, la, tout pres, a deux pas! Un lion! c'est-a-dire
la bete heroique et feroce par excellence, le roi des fauves,
le gibier de ses reves, quelque chose comme le premier sujet de
cette troupe ideale qui lui jouait de si beaux drames dans son
imagination....

[30]Un lion, mille dieux!...

Et de l'Atlas encore!!! C'etait plus que le grand Tartarin
n'en pouvait supporter....

Tout a coup un paquet de sang lui monta au visage.

Page 19

Ses yeux flamberent. D'un geste convulsif il jeta le fusil a
aiguille sur son epaule, et, se tournant vers le brave commandant
Bravida, ancien capitaine d'habillement, il lui dit d'une voix
de tonnerre: "Allons voir ca, commandant."

[5]--"He! be ... he! be ... Et mon fusil!... mon fusil
a aiguille que vous emportez!..." hasarda timidement le
prudent Costecalde; mais Tartarin avait tourne la rue, et derriere
lui tous les chasseurs de casquettes emboitant fierement
le pas.

[10]Quand ils arriverent a la menagerie, il y avait deja beaucoup
de monde. Tarascon, race heroique, mais trop longtemps privee
de spectacles a sensations, s'etait rue sur la baraque Mitaine
et l'avait prise d'assaut. Aussi la grosse madame Mitaine etait
bien contente.... En costume kabyle, les bras nus jusqu'au
[15]coude, des bracelets de fer aux chevilles, une cravache dans une
main, dans l'autre un poulet vivant, quoique plume, l'illustre
dame faisait les honneurs de la baraque aux Tarasconnais, et
comme elle avait _doubles muscles_, elle aussi, son succes etait
presque aussi grand que celui de ses pensionnaires.

[20]L'entree de Tartarin, le fusil sur l'epaule, jeta un froid.

Tous ces braves Tarasconnais, qui se promenaient bien tranquillement
devant les cages, sans armes, sans mefiance, sans
meme aucune idee de danger, eurent un mouvement de terreur assez
naturel en voyant leur grand Tartarin entrer dans la baraque avec son
[25]formidable engin de guerre. Il y avait donc
quelque chose a craindre, puisque lui, ce heros.... En un clin
d'oeil, tout le devant des cages se trouva degarni. Les enfants
criaient de peur, les dames regardaient la porte. Le pharmacien
Bezuquet s'esquiva, en disant qu'il allait chercher son fusil....

[30]Peu a peu cependant, l'attitude de Tartarin rassura les courages.
Calme, la tete haute, l'intrepide Tarasconnais fit lentement
le tour de la baraque, passa sans s'arreter devant la baignoire du
phoque, regarda d'un oeil dedaigneux la longue caisse pleine de

Page 20

son ou le boa digerait son poulet cru, et vint enfin se planter
devant la cage du lion....

Terrible et solennelle entrevue! le lion de Tarascon et le lion
de l'Atlas en face l'un de l'autre.... D'un cote, Tartarin,
[5]debout, le jarret tendu, les deux bras appuyes sur son rifle; de
l'autre, le lion, un lion gigantesque, vautre dans la paille, l'oeil
clignotant, l'air abruti, avec son enorme mufle a perruque jaune
pose sur les pattes de devant.... Tous deux calmes et se
regardant.

[10]Chose singuliere! soit que le fusil a aiguille lui eut donne de
l'humeur, soit qu'il eut flaire un ennemi de sa race, le lion, qui
jusque-la avait regarde les Tarasconnais d'un air de souverain
mepris en leur baillant au nez a tous, le lion eut tout a coup un
mouvement de colere. D'abord il renifla, gronda sourdement,
[15]ecarta ses griffes, etira ses pattes; puis il se leva, dressa la tete,
secoua sa criniere, ouvrit une gueule immense et poussa vers
Tartarin un formidable rugissement.

Un cri de terreur lui repondit. Tarascon, affole, se precipita
vers les portes. Tous, femmes, enfants, portefaix, chasseurs de
[20]casquettes, le brave commandant Bravida lui-meme.... Seul,
Tartarin de Tarascon ne bougea pas.... Il etait la, ferme et
resolu, devant la cage, des eclairs dans les yeux et cette terrible
moue que toute la ville connaissait.... Au bout d'un moment,
quand les chasseurs de casquettes, un peu rassures par son attitude
[25]et la solidite des barreaux, se rapprocherent de leur chef,
ils entendirent qu'il murmurait, en regardant le lion: "Ca, oui,
c'est une chasse."

Ce jour-la, Tartarin de Tarascon n'en dit pas davantage....


IX


_Singuliers effets du mirage_.


Page 21

Ce jour-la, Tartarin de Tarascon n'en dit pas davantage; mais
le malheureux en avait deja trop dit....

Le lendemain, il n'etait bruit dans la ville que du prochain
depart de Tartarin pour l'Algerie et la chasse aux lions. Vous
[5]etes tous temoins, chers lecteurs, que le brave homme n'avait
pas souffle mot de cela; mais vous savez, le mirage....

Bref, tout Tarascon ne parlait que de ce depart.

Sur le cours, au cercle, chez Costecalde, les gens s'abordaient
d'un air effare:

[10]"Et autrement, vous savez la nouvelle, au moins?

--Et autrement, quoi donc?... le depart de Tartarin, au
moins?"

Car a Tarascon toutes les phrases commencent par _et autrement_,
qu'on prononce _autremain_, et finissent par _au moins_, qu'on
[15]prononce _an mouain_. Or, ce jour-la, plus que tous les autres,
les _au mouain_ et les _autremain_ sonnaient a faire trembler les
vitres.

L'homme le plus surpris de la ville, en apprenant qu'il allait
partir pour l'Afrique, ce fut Tartarin. Mais voyez ce que c'est
[20]que la vanite! Au lieu de repondre simplement qu'il ne partait
pas du tout, qu'il n'avait jamais eu l'intention de partir, le pauvre
Tartarin--la premiere fois qu'on lui parla de ce voyage--fit
d'un petit air evasif: "He!... he!... peut-etre ... je ne
dis pas." La seconde fois, un peu plus familiarise avec cette
[25]idee, il repondit: "C'est probable." La troisieme fois: "C'est
certain!"

Enfin, le soir, au cercle et chez les Costecalde, entraine par
le punch aux oeufs, les bravos, les lumieres; grise par le succes

Page 22

que l'annonce de son depart avait eu dans la ville, le malheureux
declara formellement qu'il etait las de chasser la casquette et
qu'il allait, avant peu, se mettre a la poursuite des grands lions
de l'Atlas.

[5]Un hourra formidable accueillit cette declaration. La-dessus,
nouveau punch aux oeufs, poignees de mains, accolades et serenade
aux flambeaux jusqu'a minuit devant la petite maison du
baobab.

C'est Tartarin-Sancho qui n'etait pas content! Cette idee de
[10]voyage en Afrique et de chasse au lion lui donnait le frisson par
avance, et, en rentrant au logis, pendant que la serenade d'honneur
sonnait sous leurs fenetres, il fit a Tartarin-Quichotte une
scene effroyable, l'appelant toque, visionnaire, imprudent, triple
fou, lui detaillant par le menu toutes les catastrophes qui l'attendaient
[15]dans cette expedition, naufrages, rhumatismes, fievres
chaudes, dysenteries, peste noire, elephantiasis, et le reste....

En vain Tartarin-Quichotte jurait-il de ne pas faire d'imprudences,
qu'il se couvrirait bien, qu'il emporterait tout ce qu'il
faudrait, Tartarin-Sancho ne voulait rien entendre. Le pauvre
[20]homme se voyait deja dechiquete par les lions, englouti dans les
sables du desert comme feu Cambyse, et l'autre Tartarin ne
parvint a l'apaiser un peu qu'en lui expliquant que ce n'etait
pas pour tout de suite, que rien ne pressait et qu'en fin de
compte ils n'etaient pas encore partis.

[25]Il est bien clair, en effet, que l'on ne s'embarque pas pour
une expedition semblable sans prendre quelques precautions
Il faut savoir ou l'on va, que diable! et ne pas partir comme
un oiseau....

Avant toutes choses, le Tarasconnais voulut lire les recits des
[30]grands touristes africains, les relations de Mungo-Park, de Caille,
du docteur Livingstone, d'Henri Duveyrier.

La, il vit que ces intrepides voyageurs, avant de chausser leurs
sandales pour les excursions lointaines, s'etaient prepares de

Page 23

longue main a supporter la faim, la soif, les marches forcees,
les privations de toutes sortes. Tartarin voulut faire comme eux,
et, a partir de ce jour-la, ne se nourrit plus que d'_eau bouillie_.
--Ce qu'on appelle _eau bouillie_, a Tarascon, c'est quelques tranches
[5]de pain noyees dans de l'eau chaude, avec une gousse d'ail, un
peu de thym, un brin de laurier.--Le regime etait severe, et
vous pensez si le pauvre Sancho fit la grimace....

A l'entrainement par l'eau bouillie Tartarin de Tarascon joignit
d'autres sages pratiques. Ainsi, pour prendre l'habitude des
[10]longues marches, il s'astreignit a faire chaque matin son tour de
ville sept ou huit fois de suite, tantot au pas accelere, tantot au
pas gymnastique, les coudes au corps et deux petits cailloux blancs
dans la bouche, selon la mode antique.

Puis, pour se faire aux fraicheurs nocturnes, aux brouillards,
[15]a la rosee, il descendait tous les soirs dans son jardin et restait
la jusqu'a des dix et onze heures, seul avec son fusil, a l'affut
derriere le baobab....

Enfin, tant que la menagerie Mitaine resta a Tarascon,
les chasseurs de casquettes attardes chez Costecalde purent
[20]voir dans l'ombre, en passant sur la place du Chateau, un
homme mysterieux se promenant de long en large derriere la
baraque.

C'etait Tartarin de Tarascon, qui s'habituait a entendre sans
fremir les rugissements du lion dans la nuit sombre.


X


_Avant le depart_.


[25]Pendant que Tartarin s'entrainait ainsi par toute sorte de
moyens heroiques, tout Tarascon avait les yeux sur lui; on ne
s'occupait plus d'autre chose. La chasse a la casquette ne battait
plus que d'une aile, les romances chomaient. Dans la pharmacie
Bezuquet le piano languissait sous une housse verte, et

Page 24

les mouches cantharides sechaient dessus, le ventre en l'air....
L'expedition de Tartarin avait arrete tout.

Il fallait voir le succes du Tarasconnais dans les salons. On
se l'arrachait, on se le disputait, on se l'empruntait, on se le
[5]volait. Il n'y avait pas de plus grand honneur pour les dames
que d'aller a la menagerie Mitaine au bras de Tartarin, et de se
faire expliquer devant la cage du lion comment on s'y prenait
pour chasser ces grandes betes, ou il fallait viser, a combien de
pas, si les accidents etaient nombreux, etc., etc.

[10]Tartarin donnait toutes les explications qu'on voulait. Il avait
lu Jules Gerard et connaissait la chasse au lion sur le bout du
doigt, comme s'il l'avait faite. Aussi parlait-il de ces choses avec
une grande eloquence.

Mais ou il etait le plus beau, c'etait le soir a diner chez le
[15]president Ladeveze ou le brave commandant Bravida, ancien
capitaine d'habillement, quand on apportait le cafe et que, toutes
les chaises se rapprochant, on le faisait parler de ses chasses
futures....

Alors, le coude sur la nappe, le nez dans son moka, le heros
[20]racontait d'une voix emue tous les dangers qui l'attendaient
la-has. Il disait les longs affuts sans lune, les marais pestilentiels,
les rivieres empoisonnees par la feuille du laurier-rose, les
neiges, les soleils ardents, les scorpions, les pluies de sauterelles;
il disait aussi les moeurs des grands lions de l'Atlas, leur facon
[25]de combattre, leur vigueur phenomenale et leur ferocite au
temps du rut....

Puis, s'exaltant a son propre recit, il se levait de table, bondissait
au milieu de la salle a manger, imitant le cri du lion, le
[30]bruit d'une carabine, pan! pan! le sifflement d'une balle explosible,
pfft! pfft! gesticulait, rugissait, renversait les chaises....

Autour de la table, tout le monde etait pale. Les hommes se
regardaient en hochant la tete, les dames fermaient les yeux avec
de petits cris d'effroi, les vieillards brandissaient leurs longues

Page 26

cannes belliqueusement, et, dans la chambre a cote, les petits
garconnets qu'on couche de bonne heure, eveilles en sursaut
par les rugissements et les coups de feu, avaient grand'peur et
demandaient de la lumiere.

[5]En attendant, Tartarin ne partait pas.


XI


_Des coups d'epee, Messieurs, des coups d'epee....
Mais pas de coups d'epingle!_


Avait-il bien reellement l'intention de partir?... Question
delicate, et a laquelle l'historien de Tartarin serait fort embarrasse
de repondre.

Toujours est-il que la menagerie Mitaine avait quitte Tarascon
[10]depuis plus de trois mois, et le tueur de lions ne bougeait pas....
Apres tout, peut-etre le candide heros, aveugle par un nouveau
mirage, se figurait-il de bonne foi qu'il etait alle en Algerie.
Peut-etre qu'a force de raconter ses futures chasses, il s'imaginait
les avoir faites, aussi sincerement qu'il s'imaginait avoir
[15]hisse le drapeau consulaire et tire sur les Tartares, pan! pan! a
Shang-Hai.

Malheureusement, si cette fois encore Tartarin de Tarascon
fut victime du mirage, les Tarasconnais ne le furent pas. Lorsqu'au
bout de trois mois d'attente, on s'apercut que le chasseur
[20]n'avait pas encore fait une malle, on commenca a murmurer.

"Ce sera comme pour Shang-Hai!" disait Costecalde en souriant.
Et le mot de l'armurier fit fureur dans la ville; car personne
ne croyait plus en Tartarin.

Les naifs, les poltrons, des gens comme Bezuquet, qu'une
[25]puce aurait mis en fuite et qui ne pouvaient pas tirer un coup
de fusil sans fermer les yeux, ceux-la surtout etaient impitoyables.
Au cercle, sur l'esplanade, ils abordaient le pauvre Tartarin avec
de petits airs goguenards.

Page 27

"Et _autremain_, pour quand ce voyage?" Dans la boutique
Costecalde, son opinion ne faisait plus foi. Les chasseurs de
casquettes reniaient leur chef!

Puis les epigrammes s'en melerent. Le president Ladeveze,
[5]qui faisait volontiers en ses heures de loisir deux doigts de cour
a la muse provencale, composa dans la langue du cru une chanson
qui eut beaucoup de succes. Il etait question d'un certain
grand chasseur appele maitre Gervais, dont le fusil redoutable
devait exterminer jusqu'au dernier tous les lions d'Afrique. Par
[10]malheur ce diable de fusil etait de complexion singuliere: _on le
chargeait toujours, il ne partait jamais_.

Il ne partait jamais! vous comprenez l'allusion....

En un tour de main, cette chanson devint populaire; et quand
Tartarin passait, les portefaix du quai, les petits decrotteurs de
[15]devant sa porte chantaient en choeur:

_Lou fusiou de mestre Gervai
Toujou lou cargon, toujou lou cargon,
Lou fusiou de mestre Gervai
Toujou lou cargon, part jamai_.

[20]Seulement cela se chantait de loin, a cause des doubles muscles.
O fragilite des engouements de Tarascon!...
Le grand homme, lui, feignait de ne rien voir, de ne rien entendre;
mais au fond cette petite guerre sourde et venimeuse
l'affligeait beaucoup; il sentait Tarascon lui glisser dans la main,
[25]la faveur populaire aller a d'autres, et cela le faisait horriblement
souffrir.

Ah! la grande gamelle de la popularite, il fait bon s'asseoir
devant, mais quel echaudement quand elle se renverse!...

En depit de sa souffrance, Tartarin souriait et menait paisiblement
[30]sa meme vie, comme si de rien n'etait.

Quelquefois cependant ce masque de joyeuse insouciance,
qu'il s'etait par fierte colle sur le visage, se detachait subitement.
Alors, au lieu du rire, on voyait l'indignation et la douleur....

Page 28

C'est ainsi qu'un matin que les petits decrotteurs chantaient
sous ses fenetres: _Lou fusiou de mestre Gervai_, les voix de ces
miserables arriverent jusqu'a la chambre du pauvre grand homme
en train de se raser devant sa glace. (Tartarin portait toute sa
[5]barbe, mais, comme elle venait trop forte, il etait oblige de la
surveiller.)

Tout a coup la fenetre s'ouvrit violemment et Tartarin apparut
en chemise, en serre-tete, barbouille de bon savon blanc,
brandissant son rasoir et sa savonnette, et criant d'une voix
[10]formidable:

"Des coups d'epee, messieurs, des coups d'epee!... Mais
pas de coups d'epingle!"

Belles paroles dignes de l'histoire, qui n'avaient que le tort de
s'adresser a ces petits _fouchtras_, hauts comme leurs boites a
[15]cirage, et gentilhommes tout a fait incapables de tenir une epee!


XII


_De ce qui fut dit dans la petite maison du baobab_.

Au milieu de la defection generale, l'armee seule tenait bon
pour Tartarin.

Le brave commandant Bravida, ancien capitaine d'habillement,
continuait a lui marquer la meme estime: "C'est un lapin!"
[20]s'entetait-il a dire, et cette affirmation valait bien, j'imagine,
Celle du pharmacien Bezuquet.... Pas une fois le brave commandant
n'avait fait allusion au voyage en Afrique; pourtant, quand
la clameur publique devint trop forte, il se decida a parler.

Un soir, le malheureux Tartarin etait seul dans son cabinet,
[25]pensant a des choses tristes, quand il vit entrer le commandant,
grave, gante de noir, boutonne jusqu'aux oreilles.

"Tartarin," fit l'ancien capitaine avec autorite, "Tartarin, il
faut partir!" Et il restait debout dans l'encadrement de la porte,
--rigide et grand comme le devoir.

Page 29

Tout ce qu'il y avait dans ce "Tartarin, il faut partir!" Tartarin
de Tarascon le comprit.

Tres pale, il se leva, regarda autour de lui d'un oeil attendri ce
joli cabinet, bien clos, plein de chaleur et de lumiere douce, ce
[5]large fauteuil si commode, ses livres, son tapis, les grands stores
blancs de ses fenetres, derriere lesquels tremblaient les branches
greles du petit jardin, puis, s'avancant vers le brave commandant,
il lui prit la main, la serra avec energie, et d'une voix ou roulaient
des larmes, stoique cependant, il lui dit "Je partirai, Bravida!"

[10]Et il partit comme il l'avait dit. Seulement pas encore tout
de suite ... il lui fallut le temps de s'outiller.

D'abord il commanda chez Bompard deux grandes malles doublees
de cuivre, avec une longue plaque portant cette inscription:

TARTARIN DE TARASCON
CAISSE D'ARMES.

Le doublage et la gravure prirent beaucoup de temps. Il
[15]commanda aussi chez Tastavin un magnifique album de voyage
pour ecrire son journal, ses impressions, car enfin on a beau
chasser le lion, on pense tout de meme en route.

Puis il fit venir de Marseille toute une cargaison de conserves
alimentaires, du pemmican en tablettes pour faire du bouillon,
[20]une tente-abri d'un nouveau modele, se montant et se demontant
a la minute, des bottes de marin, deux parapluies, un waterproof,
des lunettes bleues pour prevenir les ophtalmies. Enfin
le pharmacien Bezuquet lui confectionna une petite pharmacie
portative bourree de sparadrap, d'arnica, de camphre, de vinaigre
[25]des quatre-voleurs.

Pauvre Tartarin! ce qu'il en faisait, ce n'etait pas pour lui;
mais il esperait, a force de precautions et d'attentions delicates,
apaiser la fureur de Tartarin-Sancho, qui, depuis que le depart
etait decide, ne decolerait ni de jour ni de nuit.


XIII


_Le depart_.


Page 30

Enfin il arriva, le jour solennel, le grand jour.

Des l'aube, tout Tarascon etait sur pied, encombrant le chemin
d'Avignon et les abords de la petite maison du baobab.

Du monde aux fenetres, sur les toits, sur les arbres; des
[5]mariniers du Rhone, des portefaix, des decrotteurs, des bourgeois,
des ourdisseuses, des taffetassieres, le cercle, enfin toute
la ville; puis aussi des gens de Beaucaire qui avaient passe le
pont, des maraichers de la banlieue, des charrettes a grandes
baches, des vignerons hisses sur de belles mules attifees de
[10]rubans, de flots, de grelots, de noeuds, de sonnettes, et meme,
de loin en loin, quelques jolies filles d'Arles venues en croupe
de leur galant, le ruban d'azur autour de la tete, sur de petits
chevaux de Camargue gris de fer.

Toute cette foule se pressait, se bousculait devant la porte
[15]de Tartarin, ce bon M. Tartarin, qui s'en allait tuer des lions
chez les _Teurs_.

Pour Tarascon, l'Algerie, l'Afrique, la Grece, la Perse, la
Turquie, la Mesopotamie, tout cela forme un grand pays tres
vague, presque mythologique, et cela s'appelle les _Teurs_ (les
[20]Turcs).

Au milieu de cette cohue, les chasseurs de casquettes allaient
et venaient, fiers du triomphe de leur chef, et tracant sur leur
passage comme des sillons glorieux.

Devant la maison du baobab, deux grandes brouettes. De
[25]temps en temps, la porte s'ouvrait, laissant voir quelques personnes
qui se promenaient gravement dans le petit jardin. Des
hommes apportaient des malles, des caisses, des sacs de nuit,
qu'ils empilaient sur les brouettes.

A chaque nouveau colis, la foule fremissait. On se nommait
[30]les objets a haute voix. "Ca, c'est la tente-abri.... Ca, ce

Page 30

sont les conserves ... la pharmacie ... les caisses d'armes...."
Et les chasseurs de casquettes donnaient des explications.

Tout a coup, vers dix heures, il se fit un grand mouvement
dans la foule. La porte du jardin tourna sur ses gonds
[5]violemment.

"C'est lui! ... c'est lui!" criait-on.

C'etait lui....

Quand il parut sur le seuil, deux cris de stupeur partirent de
la foule:
[10]"C'est un _Teur!_...

--Il a des lunettes!"

Tartarin de Tarascon, en effet, avait cru de son devoir, allant
en Algerie, de prendre le costume algerien. Large pantalon
bouffant en toile blanche, petite veste collante a boutons de
[15]metal, deux pieds de ceinture rouge autour de l'estomac, le cou
nu, le front rase, sur sa tete une gigantesque _chechia_ (bonnet
rouge) et un flot bleu d'une longueur!... Avec cela, deux
lourds fusils, un sur chaque epaule, un grand couteau de chasse
a la ceinture, sur le ventre une cartouchiere, sur la hanche un
[20]revolver se balancant dans sa poche de cuir. C'est tout....

Ah! pardon, j'oubliais les lunettes, une enorme paire de lunettes
bleues qui venaient la bien a propos pour corriger ce qu'il
y avait d'un pen trop farouche dans la tournure de notre heros!

"Vive Tartarin! ... vive Tartarin!" hurla le peuple. Le
[25]grand homme sourit, mais ne salua pas, a cause de ses fusils
qui le genaient. Du reste, il savait maintenant a quoi s'en tenir
sur la faveur populaire; peut-etre meme qu'au fond de son ame
il maudissait ses terribles compatriotes, qui l'obligeaient a partir,
a quitter son joli petit chez lui aux murs blancs, aux persiennes
[30]vertes.... Mais cela ne se voyait pas.

Calme et fier, quoiqu'un peu pale, il s'avanca sur la chaussee,
regarda ses brouettes, et, voyant que tout etait bien, prit gaillardement
le chemin de la gare, sans meme se retourner une

Page 31

fois vers la maison du baobab. Derriere lui marchaient le brave
commandant Bravida, ancien capitaine d'habillement, le president
Ladeveze, puis l'armurier Costecalde et tous les chasseurs de
casquettes, puis les brouettes, puis le peuple.

[5]Devant l'embarcadere, le chef de gare l'attendait,--un vieil
Africain de 1830, qui lui serra la main plusieurs fois avec chaleur.

L'express Paris-Marseille n'etait pas encore arrive. Tartarin
et son etat-major entrerent dans les salles d'attente. Pour eviter
l'encombrement, derriere eux le chef de gare fit fermer les grilles.

[10]Pendant un quart d'heure, Tartarin se promena de long en
large dans les salles, au milieu des chasseurs de casquettes. Il
leur parlait de son voyage, de sa chasse, promettant d'envoyer
des peaux. On s'inscrivait sur son carnet pour une peau comme
pour une contredanse.

[15]Tranquille et doux comme Socrate au moment de boire la
cigue, l'intrepide Tarasconnais avait un mot pour chacun, un
sourire pour tout le monde. Il parlait simplement, d'un air
affable; on aurait dit qu'avant de partir, il voulait laisser derriere
lui comme une trainee de charme, de regrets, de bons souvenirs.
[20]D'entendre leur chef parler ainsi, tous les chasseurs de casquettes
avaient des larmes, quelques-uns meme des remords, comme le
president Ladeveze et le pharmacien Bezuquet.

Des hommes d'equipe pleuraient dans des coins. Dehors, le
peuple regardait a travers les grilles, et criait: "Vive Tartarin!"

[25]Enfin la cloche sonna. Un roulement sourd, un sifflet dechirant
ebranla, les voutes.... En voiture! en voiture!

"Adieu, Tartarin!... adieu, Tartarin!...

--Adieu, tous!..." murmura le grand homme, et sur les
joues du brave commandant Bravida il embrassa son cher
[30]Tarascon.

Puis il s'elanca sur la voie, et monta dans un wagon plein de
Parisiennes, qui penserent mourir de peur en voyant arriver cet
homme etrange avec tant de carabines et de revolvers.


XIV


_Le port de Marseille. Embarque! Embarque!_


Page 32

Le 1er decembre 186..., a l'heure de midi, par un soleil d'hiver
provencal, un temps clair, luisant, splendide, les Marseillais
effares virent deboucher sur la Canebiere un _Teur_, oh mais, un
_Teur!..._ Jamais ils n'en avaient vu un comme celui-la; et
[5]pourtant, Dieu sait s'il en manque a Marseille, des _Teurs!_

Le _Teur_ en question,--ai-je besoin de vous le dire?--c'etait
Tartarin, le grand Tartarin de Tarascon, qui s'en allait le long
des quais, suivi de ses caisses d'armes, de sa pharmacie, de ses
conserves, rejoindre l'embarcadere de la compagnie Touache, et
[10]le paquebot le _Zouave_, qui devait l'emporter la-bas.

L'oreille encore pleine des applaudissements tarasconnais,
grise par la lumiere du ciel, l'odeur de la mer, Tartarin rayonnant
marchait, ses fusils sur l'epaule, la tete haute, regardant de
tous ses yeux ce merveilleux port de Marseille qu'il voyait pour
[15]la premiere fois, et qui l'eblouissait.... Le pauvre homme
croyait rever. Il lui semblait qu'il s'appelait Sinbad le Marin, et
qu'il errait dans une de ces villes fantastiques comme il y en a
dans les _Mille et une nuits._

C'etait a perte de vue un fouillis de mats, de vergues, se
[20]croisant dans tous les sens. Pavillons de tous les pays, russes,
grecs, suedois, tunisiens, americains.... Les navires au ras du
quai, les beaupres arrivant sur la berge comme des rangees de
baionnettes. Au-dessous les naiades, les deesses, les saintes
vierges et autres sculptures de bois peint qui donnent le nom au
[25]vaisseau; tout cela mange par l'eau de mer, devore, ruisselant,
moisi.... De temps en temps, entre les navires, un morceau
de mer, comme une grande moire tachee d'huile.... Dans
l'enchevetrement des vergues, des nuees de mouettes faisant de
jolies taches sur le ciel bleu, des mousses qui s'appelaient dans
[30]toutes les langues.

Page 33

Sur le quai, au milieu des ruisseaux qui venaient des savonneries,
verts, epais, noiratres, charges d'huile et de soude, tout
un peuple de douaniers, de commissionnaires, de portefaix avec
leurs _bogheys_ atteles de petits chevaux corses.

[5]Des magasins de confections bizarres, des baraques enfumees
ou les matelots faisaient leur cuisine, des marchands de pipes,
des marchands de singes, de perroquets, de cordes, de toiles a
voiles, des bric-a-brac fantastiques ou s'etalaient pele-mele de
vieilles coulevrines, de grosses lanternes dorees, de vieux palans,
[10]de vieilles ancres edentees, vieux cordages, vieilles poulies, vieux
portevoix, lunettes marines du temps de Jean Bart et de Duguay-Trouin. Des
vendeuses de moules et de clovisses accroupies et
piaillant a cote de leurs coquillages. Des matelots passant avec
des pots de goudron, des marmites fumantes, de grands paniers
[15]pleins de poulpes qu'ils allaient laver dans l'eau blanchatre des
fontaines.

Partout, un encombrement prodigieux de marchandises de
toute espece: soieries, minerais, trains de bois, saumons de
plomb, draps, sucres, caroubes, colzas, reglisses, cannes a sucre.
[20]L'Orient et l'Occident pele-mele. De grands tas de fromages de
Hollande que les Genoises teignaient en rouge avec leurs mains.

La-has, le quai au ble; les portefaix dechargeant leurs sacs
sur la berge du haut de grands echafaudages. Le ble, torrent
d'or, qui roulait au milieu d'une fumee blonde. Des hommes en
[25]fez rouge, le criblant a mesure dans de grands tamis de peau
d'ane, et le chargeant sur des charrettes qui s'eloignaient suivies
d'un regiment de femmes et d'enfants avec des balayettes
et des paniers a glanes.... Plus loin, le bassin de carenage,
les grands vaisseaux couches sur le flanc et qu'on flambait avec
[30]des broussailles pour les debarrasser des herbes de la mer, les
vergues trempant dans l'eau, l'odeur de la resine, le bruit assourdissant
des charpentiers doublant la coque des navires avec
de grandes plaques de cuivre.

Page 34

Parfois, entre les mats, une eclaircie. Alors Tartarin voyait
l'entree du port, le grand va-et-vient des navires, une fregate
anglaise partant pour Malte, pimpante et bien lavee, avec des
officiers en gants jaunes, ou bien un grand brick marseillais
[5]demarrant au milieu des cris, des jurons, et a l'arriere un gros
capitaine en redingote et chapeau de soie, commandant la manoeuvre
en provencal. Des navires qui s'en allaient en courant,
toutes voiles dehors. D'autres la-has, bien loin, qui arrivaient
lentement, dans le soleil, comme en l'air.

[10]Et puis tout le temps un tapage effroyable, roulement de
charrettes, ce "oh! hisse!" des matelots, jurons, chants, sifflets de
bateaux a vapeur, les tambours et les clairons du fort Saint-Jean,
du fort Saint-Nicolas, les cloches de la Major, des Accoules,
de Saint-Victor; par la-dessus le mistral qui prenait tous ces
[15]bruits, toutes ces clameurs, les roulait, les secouait, les confondait
avec sa propre voix et en faisait une musique folle, sauvage,
heroique comme la grande fanfare du voyage, fanfare qui donnait
envie de partir, d'aller loin, d'avoir des ailes.

C'est au son de cette belle fanfare que l'intrepide Tartarin de
[20]Tarascon s'embarqua pour le pays des lions!...





DEUXIEME EPISODE



CHEZ LES TEURS


I


_La traversee. Les cinq positions de la chechia.
Le soir du troisieme jour.
Misericorde._


Page 35

Je voudrais, mes chers lecteurs, etre peintre et grand peintre
pour mettre sous vos yeux, en tete de ce second episode, les
differentes positions que prit la _chechia_ de Tartarin de Tarascon,
dans ces trois jours de traversee qu'elle fit a bord du _Zouave_,
[5]entre la France et l'Algerie.

Je vous la montrerais d'abord au depart sur le pont, heroique
et superbe comme elle etait, aureolant cette belle tete tarasconnaise.
Je vous la montrerais ensuite a la sortie du port,
quand le _Zouave_ commence a caracoler sur les lames: je vous
[10]la montrerais fremissante, etonnee, et comme sentant deja les
premieres atteintes de son mal.

Puis, dans le golfe du Lion, a mesure qu'on avance au large
et que la mer devient plus dure, je vous la ferais voir aux prises
avec la tempete, se dressant effaree sur le crane du heros, et son
[15]grand flot de laine bleue qui se herisse dans la brume de mer
et la bourrasque.... Quatrieme position. Six heures du soir,
en vue des cotes corses. L'infortunee _chechia_ se penche par-dessus
le bastingage et lamentablement regarde et sonde la mer....
Enfin, cinquieme et derniere position, au fond d'une etroite cabine,
[20]dans un petit lit qui a l'air d'un tiroir de commode, quelque chose
d'informe et de desole roule en geignant sur l'oreiller. C'est la

Page 36

_chechia_, l'heroique _chechia_ du depart, reduite maintenant au vulgaire
etat de casque a meche et s'enfoncant jusqu'aux oreilles
d'une tete de malade bleme et convulsionnee....

Ah! si les Tarasconnais avaient pu voir leur grand Tartarin
[5]couche dans son tiroir de commode sous le jour blafard et triste
qui tombait des hublots, parmi cette odeur fade de cuisine et
de bois mouille, l'ecoeurante odeur du paquebot; s'ils l'avaient
entendu raler a chaque battement de l'helice, demander du the
toutes les cinq minutes et jurer contre le garcon avec une petite
[10]voix d'enfant, comme ils s'en seraient voulu de l'avoir oblige a
Partir.... Ma parole d'historien! le pauvre _Teur_ faisait pitie.
Surpris tout a coup par le mal, l'infortune n'avait pas eu le
courage de desserrer sa ceinture algerienne, ni de se defubler
de son arsenal. Le couteau de chasse a gros manche lui cassait
[15]la poitrine, le cuir de son revolver lui meurtrissait les jambes.
Pour l'achever, les bougonnements de Tartarin-Sancho, qui ne
cessait de geindre et de pester:

"Imbecile, va!... Je te l'avais bien dit!... Ah! tu as
voulu aller en Afrique ... Eh bien, te! la voila l'Afrique!...
[20]Comment la trouves-tu?"

Ce qu'il y avait de plus cruel, c'est que du fond de sa cabine
et de ses gemissements, le malheureux entendait les passagers
du grand salon rire, manger, chanter, jouer aux cartes. La
societe etait aussi joyeuse que nombreuse a bord du _Zouave_.
[25]Des officiers qui rejoignaient leurs corps, des dames de l'_Alcazar_
de Marseille, des cabotins, un riche musulman qui revenait
de la Mecque, un prince montenegrin tres farceur qui faisait
des imitations de Ravel et de Gil Peres.... Pas un de ces
gens-la n'avait le mal de mer, et leur temps se passait a boire
[30]du Champagne avec le capitaine du _Zouave_, un bon gros vivant
de Marseillais, qui avait menage a Alger et a Marseille, et
repondait au joyeux nom de Barbassou.

Page 37

Tartarin de Tarascon en voulait a tous ces miserables. Leur
gaiete redoublait son mal....

Enfin, dans l'apres-midi du troisieme jour, il se fit a bord du
navire un mouvement extraordinaire qui tira notre heros de sa
[5]longue torpeur. La cloche de l'avant sonnait. On entendait les
grosses bottes des matelots courir sur le pont.

"Machine en avant!... machine en arriere!" criait la voix
enrouee du capitaine Barbassou.

Puis "Machine, stop!" Un grand arret, une secousse, et
[10]plus rien.... Rien que le paquebot se balancant silencieusement
de droite a gauche, comme un ballon dans l'air....

Cet etrange silence epouvanta le Tarasconnais.

"Misericorde! nous sombrons!" cria-t-il d'une voix terrible,
et, retrouvant ses forces par magie, il bondit de sa couchette,
[15]et se precipita sur le pont avec son arsenal.


II


_Aux armes! Aux armes!_


On ne sombrait pas, on arrivait.

Le _Zouave_ venait d'entrer dans la rade, une belle rade aux
eaux noires et profondes, mais silencieuse, morne, presque
deserte. En face, sur une colline, Alger la blanche avec ses
[20]petites maisons d'un blanc mat qui descendent vers la mer,
serrees les unes contre les autres. Un etalage de blanchisseuse
sur le coteau de Meudon. Par la-dessus un grand ciel de satin
bleu, oh! mais si bleu!...

L'illustre Tartarin, un peu remis de sa frayeur, regardait le
[25]paysage, en ecoutant avec respect le prince montenegrin, qui,
debout a ses cotes, lui nommait les differents quartiers de la ville,
la Casbah, la ville haute, la rue Bab-Azoun. Tres bien eleve, ce
prince montenegrin, de plus connaissant a fond l'Algerie et
parlant l'arabe couramment. Aussi Tartarin se proposait-il de

Page 38

cultiver sa connaissance.... Tout a coup, le long du bastingage
contre lequel ils etaient appuyes, le Tarasconnais apercoit
une rangee de grosses mains noires qui se cramponnaient par
dehors. Presque aussitot une tete de negre toute crepue apparait
[5]devant lui, et, avant qu'il ait eu le temps d'ouvrir la bouche,
le pont se trouve envahi de tous cotes par une centaine de forbans,
noirs, jaunes, a moitie nus, hideux, terribles.

Ces forbans-la, Tartarin les connaissait.... C'etaient eux,
c'est-a-dire ILS, ces fameux ILS qu'il avait si souvent cherches la
[10]nuit dans les rues de Tarascon. Enfin ILS se decidaient donc
a venir!

... D'abord la surprise le cloua sur place. Mais quand il
vit les forbans se precipiter sur les bagages, arracher la bache
qui les recouvrait, commencer enfin le pillage du navire, alors
[15]le heros se reveilla, et degainant son couteau de chasse: "Aux
armes! aux armes!" cria-t-il aux voyageurs, et le premier de
tous, il fondit sur les pirates.

"_Ques aco?_ qu'est-ce qu'il y a? qu'est-ce que vous avez?"
fit le capitaine Barbassou, qui sortait de l'entrepont.
[20]"Ah! vous voila, capitaine!... vite, vite, armez vos hommes.

--He! pourquoi faire, _boun Diou?_

--Mais vous ne voyez donc pas...?

--Quoi donc?...

--La ... devant vous ... les pirates...."

[25]Le capitaine Barbassou le regardait tout ahuri. A ce moment,
un grand diable de negre passait devant eux, en courant, avec
la pharmacie du heros sur son dos:

"Miserable!... attends-moi!..." hurla le Tarasconnais;
et il s'elanca, la dague en avant.
[30]Barbassou le rattrapa au vol, et, le retenant par sa ceinture:

"Mais restez donc tranquille, tron de ler!... Ce ne sont
pas des pirates.... Il y a longtemps qu'il n'y en a plus de
Pirates.... Ce sont des portefaix.

Page 39

--Des portefaix!...

--He! oui, des portefaix, qui viennent chercher les bagages
pour les porter a terre.... Rengainez donc votre coutelas,
donnez-moi votre billet, et marchez derriere ce negre, un brave
[5]garcon, qui va vous conduire a terre, et meme jusqu'a l'hotel si
vous le desirez!..."

Un peu confus, Tartarin donna son billet, et, se mettant a
la suite du negre, descendit par le tire-vieille dans une grosse
barque qui dansait le long du navire. Tous ses bagages y
[10]etaient deja, ses malles, caisses d'armes, conserves alimentaires;
comme ils tenaient toute la barque, on n'eut pas besoin d'attendre
d'autres voyageurs. Le negre grimpa sur les malles et
s'y accroupit comme un singe, les genoux dans ses mains. Un
autre negre prit les rames.... Tous deux regardaient Tartarin
[15]en riant et montrant leurs dents blanches.

Debout a l'arriere, avec cette terrible moue qui faisait la terreur
de ses compatriotes, le grand Tarasconnais tourmentait fievreusement
le manche de son coutelas; car, malgre ce qu'avait
pu lui dire Barbassou, il n'etait qu'a moitie rassure sur les intentions
[20]de ces portefaix a peau d'ebene, qui ressemblaient si peu
aux braves portefaix de Tarascon....

Cinq minutes apres, la barque arrivait a terre, et Tartarin
posait le pied sur ce petit quai barbaresque, ou trois cents ans
auparavant, un galerien espagnol nomme Michel Cervantes preparait
[25]--sous le baton de la chiourme algerienne--un sublime
roman qui devait s'appeler _Don Quichotte_!


III


_Invocation a Cervantes. Debarquement.
Ou sont les Teurs? Pas de Teurs.
Desillusion._


Page 40

O Michel Cervantes Saavedra, si ce qu'on dit est vrai, qu'aux
lieux ou les grands hommes ont habite quelque chose d'eux-memes
erre et flotte dans l'air jusqu'a la fin des ages, ce qui
restait de toi sur la plage barbaresque dut tressaillir de joie en
[5]voyant debarquer Tartarin de Tarascon, ce type merveilleux
du Francais du Midi en qui s'etaient incarnes les deux heros de
ton livre, Don Quichotte et Sancho Panca....

L'air etait chaud ce jour-la. Sur le quai ruisselant de soleil,
cinq ou six douaniers, des Algeriens attendant des nouvelles de
[10]France, quelques Maures accroupis qui fumaient leurs longues
pipes, des matelots maltais ramenant de grands filets ou des
milliers de sardines luisaient entre les mailles comme de petites
pieces d'argent.

Mais a peine Tartarin eut-il mis pied a terre, le quai s'anima,
[15]changea d'aspect. Une bande de sauvages, encore plus hideux
que les forbans du bateau, se dressa d'entre les cailloux de la
berge et se rua sur le debarquant. Grands Arabes tout nus sous
des couvertures de laine, petits Maures en guenilles, Negres,
Tunisiens, Mahonnais, M'zabites, garcons d'hotel en tablier
[20]blanc, tous criant, hurlant, s'accrochant a ses habits, se disputant
ses bagages, l'un emportant ses conserves, l'autre sa pharmacie,
et, dans un charabia fantastique, lui jetant a la tete des
noms d'hotel invraisemblables....

Etourdi de tout ce tumulte, le pauvre Tartarin allait, venait,
[25]pestait, jurait, se demenait, courait apres ses bagages, et, ne
sachant comment se faire comprendre de ces barbares, les
haranguait en francais, en provencal, et meme en latin, du
latin de Pourceaugnac, _rosa, la rose, bonus, bona, bonum_, tout

Page 41

ce qu'il savait.... Peine perdue. On ne l'ecoutait pas....
Heureusement qu'un petit homme, vetu d'une tunique a collet
jaune, et arme d'une longue canne de compagnon, intervint
comme un dieu d'Homere dans la melee, et dispersa toute cette
[5]racaille a coups de baton. C'etait un sergent de ville algerien.
Tres poliment, il engagea Tartarin a descendre a l'hotel de
l'Europe, et le confia a des garcons de l'endroit qui l'emmenerent,
lui et ses bagages, en plusieurs brouettes.

Aux premiers pas qu'il fit dans Alger, Tartarin de Tarascon
[10]ouvrit de grands yeux. D'avance il s'etait figure une
ville orientale, feerique, mythologique, quelque chose tenant le
milieu entre Constantinople et Zanzibar.... Il tombait en
plein Tarascon.... Des cafes, des restaurants, de larges
rues, des maisons a quatre etages, une petite place macadamisee
[15]ou des musiciens de la ligne jouaient des polkas d'Offenbach,
des messieurs sur des chaises buvant de la biere avec
des echaudes, des dames, quelques lorettes, et puis des militaires,
encore des militaires, toujours des militaires ... et pas
un _Teur!..._ Il n'y avait que lui.... Aussi, pour traverser
[20]la place, se trouva-t-il un peu gene. Tout le monde le regardait.
Les musiciens de la ligne s'arreterent, et la polka d'Offenbach
resta un pied en l'air.

Les deux fusils sur l'epaule, le revolver sur la hanche, farouche
et majestueux comme Robinson Crusoe, Tartarin passa
[25]gravement au milieu de tous les groupes; mais en arrivant a
l'hotel ses forces l'abandonnerent. Le depart de Tarascon, le
port de Marseille, la traversee, le prince montenegrin, les pirates,
tout se brouillait et roulait dans sa tete.... Il fallut le monter
a sa chambre, le desarmer, le deshabiller.... Deja meme on
[30]parlait d'envoyer chercher un medecin; mais, a peine sur l'oreiller,
le heros se mit a ronfler si haut et de si bon coeur, que l'hotelier
jugea les secours de la science inutiles, et tout le monde se retira
discretement.


IV


_Le premier affut._


Page 42

Trois heures sonnaient a l'horloge du Gouvernement, quand
Tartarin se reveilla. Il avait dormi toute la soiree, toute la nuit,
toute la matinee, et meme un bon morceau de l'apres-midi; il
faut dire aussi que depuis trois jours la _chechia_ en avait vu de
[5]rudes!...

La premiere pensee du heros, en ouvrant les yeux, fut celle-ci:
"Je suis dans le pays du lion!" pourquoi ne pas le dire? a
cette idee que les lions etaient la tout pres, a deux pas, et
presque sous la main, et qu'il allait falloir en decoudre, brr! ... un
[10]froid mortel le saisit, et il se fourra intrepidement sous
sa couverture.

Mais, au bout d'un moment, la gaiete du dehors, le ciel si
bleu, le grand soleil qui ruisselait dans la chambre, un bon petit
dejeuner qu'il se fit servir au lit, sa fenetre grande ouverte sur
[15]la mer, le tout arrose d'un excellent flacon de vin de Crescia,
lui rendit bien vite son ancien heroisme. "Au lion! au lion!"
cria-t-il en rejetant sa couverture, et il s'habilla prestement.

Voici quel etait son plan: sortir de la ville sans rien dire a
personne, se jeter en plein desert, attendre la nuit, s'embusquer,
[20]et, au premier lion qui passerait, pan! pan!... Puis revenir
le lendemain dejeuner a l'hotel de l'Europe, recevoir les felicitations
des Algeriens et freter une charrette pour aller chercher
l'animal.

Il s'arma donc a la hate, roula sur son dos la tente-abri dont
[25]le gros manche montait d'un bon pied au-dessus de sa tete, et
raide comme un pieu, descendit dans la rue. La, ne voulant
demander sa route a personne de peur de donner l'eveil sur
ses projets, il tourna carrement a droite, enfila jusqu'an bout
les arcades Bab-Azoun, ou du fond de leurs noires boutiques
[30]des nuees de juifs algeriens le regardaient passer, embusques

Page 43

dans un coin comme des araignees; traversa la place du Theatre,
prit le faubourg et enfin la grande route poudreuse de Mustapha.

Il y avait sur cette route un encombrement fantastique. Omnibus,
fiacres, corricolos, des fourgons du train, de grandes charrettes
[5]de foin trainees par des boeufs, des escadrons de chasseurs
d'Afrique, des troupeaux de petits anes microscopiques, des
negresses qui vendaient des galettes, des voitures d'Alsaciens
emigrants, des spahis en manteaux rouges, tout cela defilant
dans un tourbillon de poussiere, au milieu des cris, des chants,
[10]des trompettes, entre deux haies de mechantes baraques ou
l'on voyait de grandes Mahonnaises se peignant devant leurs
portes, des cabarets pleins de soldats, des boutiques de bouchers,
D'equarrisseurs....

"Qu'est-ce qu'ils me chantent donc avec leur Orient?" pensait
[15]le grand Tartarin; "il n'y a pas meme tant de _Teurs_ qu'a
Marseille."

Tout a coup, il vit passer pres de lui, allongeant ses grandes
jambes et rengorge comme un dindon, un superbe chameau.
Cela lui fit battre le coeur.

[20]Des chameaux deja! Les lions ne devaient pas etre loin; et,
en effet, au bout de cinq minutes, il vit arriver vers lui, le fusil
sur l'epaule, toute une troupe de chasseurs de lions.

"Les laches!" se dit notre heros en passant a cote d'eux,
"les laches! Aller au lion par bandes, et avec des chiens!..."
[25]Car il ne se serait jamais imagine qu'en Algerie on put chasser
autre chose que des lions. Pourtant ces chasseurs avaient de
si bonnes figures de commercants retires, et puis cette facon
de chasser le lion avec des chiens et des carnassieres etait si
patriarcale, que le Tarasconnais, un peu intrigue, crut devoir
[30]aborder un de ces messieurs.

"Et autrement, camarade, bonne chasse?

--Pas mauvaise," repondit l'autre en regardant d'un oeil
effare l'armement considerable du guerrier de Tarascon.

Page 44

"Vous avez tue?

--Mais oui ... pas mal ... voyez plutot." Et le chasseur algerien
montrait sa carnassiere, toute gonflee de lapins et de becasses.

"Comment ca! votre carnassiere?... vous les mettez dans
[5]votre carnassiere?

--Ou voulez-vous donc que je les mette?

--Mais alors, c'est ... c'est des tout petits....

--Des petits et puis des gros," fit le chasseur. Et comme
il etait presse de rentrer chez lui, il rejoignit ses camarades a
[10]grandes enjambees.

L'intrepide Tartarin en resta plante de stupeur au milieu de
la route.... Puis, apres un moment de reflexion: "Bah!"
se dit-il, "ce sont des blagueurs.... Ils n'ont rien tue du
Tout...." et il continua son chemin.

[15]Deja les maisons se faisaient plus rares, les passants aussi.
La nuit tombait, les objets devenaient confus... Tartarin de
Tarascon marcha encore une demi-heure. A la fin il s'arreta....
C'etait tout a fait la nuit. Nuit sans lune, criblee d'etoiles.
Personne sur la route.... Malgre tout, le heros pensa que
[20]les lions n'etaient pas des diligences et ne devaient pas volontiers
suivre le grand chemin. Il se jeta a travers champs....
A chaque pas des fosses, des ronces, des broussailles. N'importe!
il marchait toujours.... Puis tout a coup, halte! "Il
y a du lion dans l'air par ici," se dit notre homme, et il renifla
[25]fortement de droite et de gauche.


V


_Pan! Pan!_


C'etait un grand desert sauvage, tout herisse de plantes
bizarres, de ces plantes d'Orient qui ont l'air de betes mechantes.
Sous le jour discret des etoiles, leur ombre agrandie s'etirait par
terre en tous sens. A droite, la masse confuse et lourde d'une

Page 45

montagne, l'Atlas peut-etre!... A gauche, la mer invisible,
qui roulait sourdement.... Un vrai gite a tenter les fauves....

Un fusil devant lui, un autre dans les mains, Tartarin de
Tarascon mit un genou en terre et attendit.... Il attendit une
[5]heure, deux heures.... Rien!... Alors il se souvint que, dans
ses livres, les grands tueurs de lions n'allaient jamais a la chasse
sans emmener un petit chevreau qu'ils attachaient a quelques
pas devant eux et qu'ils faisaient crier en lui tirant la patte
avec une ficelle. N'ayant pas de chevreau, le Tarasconnais eut
[10]l'idee d'essayer des imitations, et se mit a beler d'une voix
chevrotante: "Me! Me!..."

D'abord tres doucement, parce qu'au fond de l'ame il avait
tout de meme un peu peur que le lion l'entendit ... puis, voyant
que rien ne venait, il bela plus fort: "Me!... Me!..."
[15]Rien encore!... Impatiente, il reprit de plus belle et plusieurs
fois de suite: "Me!... Me!... Me!..." avec tant de
puissance que ce chevreau finissait par avoir l'air d'un boeuf....

Tout a coup, a quelques pas devant lui, quelque chose de
noir et de gigantesque s'abattit. Il se tut.... Cela se baissait, flairait
[20]la terre, bondissait, se roulait, partait au galop, puis revenait
et s'arretait net ... c'etait le lion, a n'en pas douter!...
Maintenant on voyait tres bien ses quatre pattes courtes, sa
formidable encolure, et deux yeux, deux grands yeux qui luisaient dans
l'ombre.... En joue! feu! pan! pan!... C'etait
[25]fait. Puis tout de suite un bondissement en arriere, et le coutelas
de chasse au poing.

Au coup de feu du Tarasconnais, un hurlement terrible
repondit.

"Il en a!" cria le bon Tartarin, et, ramasse sur ses fortes
[30]jambes, il se preparait a recevoir la bete; mais elle en avait plus
que son compte et s'enfuit au triple galop en hurlant.... Lui
pourtant ne bougea pas. Il attendait la femelle ... toujours
comme dans ses livres!

Page 46

Par malheur la femelle ne vint pas. Au bout de deux ou
trois heures d'attente, le Tarasconnais se lassa. La terre etait
humide, la nuit devenait fraiche, la bise de mer piquait.

"Si je faisais un somme en attendant le jour?" se dit-il, et,
[5]pour eviter les rhumatismes, il eut recours a la tente-abri....
Mais voila le diable! cette tente-abri etait d'un systeme si ingenieux,
si ingenieux, qu'il ne put jamais venir a bout de l'ouvrir.

Il eut beau s'escrimer et suer pendant une heure, la damnee
tente ne s'ouvrit pas.... Il y a des parapluies qui, par des
[10]pluies torrentielles, s'amusent a vous jouer de ces tours-la....
De guerre lasse, le Tarasconnais jeta l'ustensile par terre, et se
coucha dessus, en jurant comme un vrai Provencal qu'il etait.

"_Ta, ta, ra, ta, Tarata!_....

--_Ques aco?..._" fit Tartarin, s'eveillant en sursaut.
[15]C'etaient les clairons des chasseurs d'Afrique qui sonnaient
la diane, dans les casernes de Mustapha.... Le tueur de
lions, stupefait, se frotta les yeux.... Lui qui se croyait en
plein desert!... Savez-vous ou il etait...? Dans un carre
d'artichauts, entre un plant de choux-fleurs et un plant de
[20]betteraves.

Son Sahara avait des legumes.... Tout pres de lui, sur la
jolie cote verte de Mustapha superieur, des villas algeriennes,
toutes blanches, luisaient dans la rosee du jour levant: on se
serait cru aux environs de Marseille, au milieu des _bastides_ et
[25]des _bastidons_.

La physionomie bourgeoise et potagere de ce paysage endormi
etonna beaucoup le pauvre homme, et le mit de fort mechante
humeur.

"Ces gens-la sont fous," se disait-il, "de planter leurs artichauts dans
[30]le voisinage du lion.... car enfin, je n'ai pas reve....
Les lions viennent jusqu'ici.... En voila la preuve...."

La preuve, c'etaient des taches de sang que la bete en fuyant
avait laissees derriere elle. Penche sur cette piste sanglante, l'oeil

Page 47

aux aguets, le revolver au poing, le vaillant Tarasconnais arriva,
d'artichaut en artichaut, jusqu'a un petit champ d'avoine....
De l'herbe foulee, une mare de sang, et, au milieu de la mare,
couche sur le flanc avec une large plaie a la tete, un....
[5]Devinez quoi!...

"Un lion, parbleu!..."

Non! un ane, un de ces tout petits anes qui sont si communs
en Algerie et qu'on designe la-bas sous le nom de _bourriquots_.


VI


_Arrivee de la femelle. Terrible combat.
Le Rendez-vous des Lapins._


Le premier mouvement de Tartarin a l'aspect de sa malheureuse
[10]victime fut un mouvement de depit. Il y a si loin en effet
d'un lion a un _bourriquot!_.... Son second mouvement fut tout
a la pitie. Le pauvre bourriquot etait si joli; il avait l'air si bon!
La peau de ses flancs, encore chaude, allait et venait comme une
vague. Tartarin s'agenouilla, et du bout de sa ceinture algerienne
[15]essaya d'etancher le sang de la malheureuse bete; et ce
grand homme soignant ce petit ane, c'etait tout ce que vous
pouvez imaginer de plus touchant.

Au contact soyeux de la ceinture, le bourriquot, qui avait
encore pour deux liards de vie, ouvrit son grand oeil gris, remua
[20]deux ou trois fois ses longues oreilles comme pour dire:
"Merci!... merci!..." Puis une derniere convulsion l'agita
de tete en queue et il ne bougea plus.

"Noiraud! Noiraud!" cria tout a coup une voix etranglee
par l'angoisse. En meme temps dans un taillis voisin les branches
[25]remuerent.... Tartarin n'eut que le temps de se relever et
de se mettre en garde.... C'etait la femelle!

Elle arriva, terrible et rugissante, sous les traits d'une vieille
Alsacienne en marmotte, armee d'un grand parapluie rouge et

Page 48

reclamant son ane a tous les echos de Mustapha. Certes il aurait
mieux valu pour Tartarin avoir affaire a une lionne en furie
qu'a cette mechante vieille.... Vainement le malheureux essaya
de lui faire entendre comment la chose s'etait passee; qu'il avait
[5]pris Noiraud pour un lion.... La vieille crut qu'on voulait se
moquer d'elle, et poussant d'energiques "tarteifle!" tomba sur
le heros a coups de parapluie. Tartarin, un peu confus, se
defendait de son mieux, parait les coups avec sa carabine,
suait, soufflait, bondissait, criait:--"Mais Madame ... mais
[10]Madame...."

Va te promener! Madame etait sourde, et sa vigueur le
prouvait bien.

Heureusement un troisieme personnage arriva sur le champ
de bataille. C'etait le mari de l'Alsacienne, Alsacien lui-meme
[15]et cabaretier; de plus, fort bon comptable. Quand il vit a qui il
avait affaire, et que l'assassin ne demandait qu'a payer le prix
de la victime, il desarma son epouse et l'on s'entendit.

Tartarin donna deux cents francs: l'ane en valait bien dix.
C'est le prix courant des _bourriquots_ sur les marches arabes.
[20]Puis on enterra le pauvre Noiraud au pied d'un figuier, et
l'Alsacien, mis en bonne humeur par la couleur des douros
tarasconnais, invita le heros a venir rompre une croute a son
cabaret, qui se trouvait a quelques pas de la, sur le bord de la
grande route.

[25]Les chasseurs algeriens venaient y dejeuner tous les dimanches
car la plaine etait giboyeuse et a deux lieues autour
de la ville il n'y avait pas de meilleur endroit pour les lapins.

"Et les lions?" demanda Tartarin.
L'Alsacien le regarda, tres etonne: "Les lions?
[30]--Oui ... les lions ... en voyez-vous quelquefois?" reprit
le pauvre homme avec un peu moins d'assurance.
Le cabaretier eclata de rire:

Page 49

"Ah! ben! merci.... Des lions ... pourquoi faire?...

--Il n'y en a donc pas en Algerie?...

--Ma foi! je n'en ai jamais vu.... Et pourtant voila vingt
ans que j'habite la province. Cependant je crois bien avoir
[5]entendu dire.... Il me semble que les journaux.... Mais
c'est beaucoup plus loin, la-bas, dans le Sud...."

A ce moment, ils arrivaient au cabaret. Un cabaret de banlieue,
comme on en voit a Vanves ou a Pantin, avec un rameau
tout fane au-dessus de la porte, des queues de billard peintes
[10]sur les murs et cette enseigne inoffensive:

AU RENDEZ-VOUS DES LAPINS

Le Rendez-vous des Lapins!... O Bravida, quel souvenir!


VII


_Histoire d'un omnibus, d'une Mauresque
et d'un chapelet de fleurs de jasmin._


Cette premiere aventure aurait eu de quoi decourager bien
des gens; mais les hommes trempes comme Tartarin ne se
[15]laissent pas facilement abattre.

"Les lions sont dans le Sud," pensa le heros; "eh bien!
j'irai dans le Sud."

Et des qu'il eut avale son dernier morceau, il se leva, remercia
son hote, embrassa la vieille sans rancune, versa une derniere
[20]larme sur l'infortune Noiraud, et retourna bien vite a Alger avec
la ferme intention de boucler ses malles et de partir le jour
meme pour le Sud.

Malheureusement la grande route de Mustapha semblait s'etre
allongee depuis la veille: il faisait un soleil, une poussiere! La
[25]tente-abri etait d'un lourd!... Tartarin ne se sentit pas le

Page 50

courage d'aller a pied jusqu'a la ville, et le premier omnibus qui
passa, il fit signe et monta dedans....

Ah! pauvre Tartarin de Tarascon! Combien il aurait mieux
fait pour son nom, pour sa gloire, de ne pas entrer dans cette
[5]fatale guimbarde et de continuer pedestrement sa route, au risque
de tomber asphyxie sous le poids de l'atmosphere, de la tente-abri
et de ses lourds fusils rayes a doubles canons....

Tartarin etant monte, L'omnibus fut complet. Il y avait au
fond, le nez dans son breviaire, un vicaire d'Alger a grande
[10]barbe noire. En face, un jeune marchand maure, qui fumait de
grosses cigarettes. Puis, un matelot maltais, et quatre ou cinq
Mauresques masquees de linges blancs, et dont on ne pouvait
voir que les yeux. Ces dames venaient de faire leurs devotions
an cimetiere d'Abd-el-Kader; mais cette visite funebre ne semblait
[15]pas les avoir attristees. On les entendait rire et jacasser
entre elles sous leurs masques, en croquant des patisseries.

Tartarin crut s'apercevoir qu'elles le regardaient beaucoup.
Une surtout, celle qui etait assise en face de lui, avait plante
son regard dans le sien, et ne le retira pas de toute la route.
[20]Quoique la dame fut voilee, la vivacite de ce grand oeil noir
allonge par le k'hol, un poignet delicieux et fin charge de bracelets
d'or qu'on entrevoyait de temps en temps entre les voiles,
tout, le son de la voix, les mouvements gracieux, presque enfantins
de la tete, disait qu'il y avait la-dessous quelque chose de
[25]jeune, de joli, d'adorable ... Le malheureux Tartarin ne
savait ou se fourrer. La caresse muette de ces beaux yeux
d'Orient le troublait, l'agitait, le faisait mourir; il avait chaud,
il avait froid....

Pour l'achever, la pantoufle de la dame s'en mela: sur ses
[30]grosses bottes de chasse, il la sentait courir, cette mignonne
pantoufle courir et fretiller comme une petite souris rouge....
Que faire? Repondre a ce regard, a cette pression! Oui, mais
les consequences.... Une intrigue d'amour en Orient, c'est

Page 51

quelque chose de terrible!... Et avec son imagination romanesque
et meridionale, le brave Tarasconnais se voyait deja
tombant aux mains des eunuques, decapite, mieux que cela
peut-etre, cousu dans un sac de cuir, et roulant sur la mer, sa
[5]tete a cote de lui. Cela le refroidissait un peu.... En attendant,
la petite pantoufle continuait son manege, et les yeux
d'en face s'ouvraient tout grands vers lui comme deux fleurs
de velours noir, en ayant l'air de dire:

--Cueille-nous!...

[10]L'omnibus s'arreta. On etait sur la place du Theatre, a
l'entree de la rue Bab-Azoun. Une a une, empetrees dans leurs
grands pantalons et serrant leurs voiles contre elles avec une
grace sauvage, les Mauresques descendirent. La voisine de
Tartarin se leva la derniere, et en se levant son visage passa si
[15]pres de celui du heros qu'il l'effleura de son haleine, un vrai
bouquet de jeunesse, de jasmin, de musc et de patisserie.

Le Tarasconnais n'y resista pas. Ivre d'amour et pret a tout,
il s'elanca derriere la Mauresque.... Au bruit de ses buffleteries
elle se retourna, mit un doigt sur son masque comme pour
[20]dire "chut!" et vivement, de l'autre main, elle lui jeta un petit
chapelet parfume, fait avec des fleurs de jasmin. Tartarin de
Tarascon se baissa pour le ramasser; mais, comme notre heros
etait un peu lourd et tres charge d'armures, I'operation fut assez
longue....

[25]Quand il se releva, le chapelet de jasmin sur son coeur,--la
Mauresque avait disparu.


VIII


_Lions de l'Atlas, dormez!_


Lions de I'Atlas, dormez! Dormez tranquilles au fond de
vos retraites, dans les aloes et les cactus sauvages.... De
quelques jours encore, Tartarin de Tarascon ne vous massacrera
[30]point. Pour le moment, tout son attirail de guerre,

Page 52

--caisses d'armes, pharmacie, tente-abri, conserves alimentaires,
--repose paisiblement emballe, a l'hotel d'Europe, dans un coin
de la chambre 36.

Dormez sans peur, grands lions roux! Le Tarasconnais
[5]cherche sa Mauresque. Depuis l'histoire de l'omnibus, le
malheureux croit sentir perpetuellement sur son pied, sur son vaste
pied de trappeur, les fretillements de la petite souris rouge; et
la brise de mer, en effleurant ses levres, se parfume toujours
--quoi qu'il fasse--d'une amoureuse odeur de patisserie et d'anis.

[10]Il lui faut sa Maugrabine!

Mais ce n'est pas une mince affaire! Retrouver dans une
ville de cent mille ames une personne dont on ne connait que
l'haleine, les pantoufles et la couleur des yeux; il n'y a qu'un
Tarasconnais, feru d'amour, capable de tenter une pareille
[15]aventure.

Le terrible c'est que, sous leurs grands masques blancs, toutes
les Mauresques se ressemblent; puis ces dames ne sortent guere,
et, quand on veut en voir, il faut monter dans la ville haute, la
ville arabe, la ville des _Teurs_.

[20]Un vrai coupe-gorge, cette ville haute. De petites ruelles
noires tres etroites, grimpant a pic entre deux rangees de maisons
mysterieuses dont les toitures se rejoignent et font tunnel.
Des portes basses, des fenetres toutes petites, muettes, tristes,
grillagees. Et puis, de droite et de gauche, un tas d'echoppes
[25]tres sombres ou les _Teurs_ farouches a tetes de forbans
--yeux blancs et dents brillantes--fument de longues pipes,
et se parlent a voix basse comme pour concerter de mauvais
coups....

Dire que notre Tartarin traversait sans emotion cette cite
[30]formidable, ce serait mentir. Il etait au contraire tres emu,
et dans ces ruelles obscures dont son gros ventre tenait toute la
largeur, le brave homme n'avancait qu'avec la plus grande precaution,
l'oeil aux aguets, le doigt sur la detente d'un revolver.

Page 53

Tout a fait comme a Tarascon, en allant au cercle. A chaque
instant il s'attendait a recevoir sur le dos toute une degringolade
d'eunuques et de janissaires, mais le desir de revoir sa dame lui
donnait une audace et une force de geant.

[5]Huit jours durant, l'intrepide Tartarin ne quitta pas la ville
haute. Tantot on le voyait faire le pied de grue devant les bains
maures, attendant l'heure ou ces dames sortent par bandes, frissonnantes
et sentant le bain; tantot il apparaissait accroupi a
la porte des mosquees, suant et soufflant pour quitter ses grosses
[10]bottes avant d'entrer dans le sanctuaire....

Parfois, a la tombee de la nuit, quand il s'en revenait navre
de n'avoir rien decouvert, pas plus au bain qu'a la mosquee, le
Tarasconnais, en passant devant les maisons mauresques, entendait des
chants monotones, des sons etouffes de guitare, des
[15]roulements de tambours de basque, et des petits rires de femme
qui lui faisaient battre le coeur.

"Elle est peut-etre la!" se disait-il.

Alors, si la rue etait deserte, il s'approchait d'une de ces
maisons, levait le lourd marteau de la poterne basse, et frappait
[20]timidement.... Aussitot les chants, les rires cessaient. On
n'entendait plus derriere la muraille que de petits chuchotements
vagues, comme dans une voliere endormie.

"Tenons-nous bien!" pensait le heros.... "Il va m'arriver
quelque chose!"

[25]Ce qui lui arrivait le plus souvent, c'etait une grande potee
d'eau froide sur la tete, ou bien des peaux d'oranges et de figues
de Barbarie.... Jamais rien de plus grave....

Lions de l'Atlas, dormez!


IX


_Le prince Gregory du Montenegro._


Page 54

Il y avait deux grandes semaines que l'infortune Tartarin
cherchait sa dame algerienne, et tres vraisemblablement il la
chercherait encore, si la Providence des amants n'etait venue a
son aide sous les traits d'un gentilhomme montenegrin. Voici:
[5]En hiver, toutes les nuits de samedi, le grand theatre d'Alger
donne son bal masque, ni plus ni moins que l'Opera. C'est
l'eternel et insipide bal masque de province. Peu de monde
dans la salle, quelques epaves de Bullier ou du Casino, vierges
folles suivant l'armee, chicards fanes, debardeurs en deroute, et
[10]cinq ou six petites blanchisseuses mahonnaises qui se lancent,
mais gardent de leur temps de vertu un vague parfum d'ail et
de sauces safranees.... Le vrai coup d'oeil n'est pas la. Il
est au foyer, transforme pour la circonstance en salon de jeu....
Une foule fievreuse et bariolee s'y bouscule, autour des
[15]longs tapis verts: des turcos en permission misant les gros sous
du pret, des Maures marchands de la ville haute, des negres,
des Maltais, des colons de l'interieur qui ont fait quarante lieues
pour venir hasarder sur un as l'argent d'une charrue ou d'un
couple de boeufs.... tous fremissants, pales, les dents serrees,
[20]avec ce regard singulier du joueur, trouble, en biseau, devenu
louche a force de fixer toujours la meme carte.

Plus loin, ce sont des tribus de juifs algeriens, jouant en famille.
Les hommes out le costume oriental hideusement agremente
de bas bleus et de casquettes de velours. Les femmes,
[25]bouffies et blafardes, se tiennent toutes raides dans leurs
etroits plastrons d'or.... Groupee autour des tables, toute la tribu
piaille, se concerte, compte sur ses doigts et joue peu. De
temps en temps seulement, apres de longs conciliabules, un
vieux patriarche a barbe de Pere eternel se detache, et va risquer
[30]le douro familial.... C'est alors, tant que la partie dure<

Page 55

un scintillement d'yeux hebraiques tournes vers la table, terribles
yeux d'aimant noir qui font fretiller les pieces d'or sur
le tapis et finissent par les attirer tout doucement comme par
un fil....

[5]Puis des querelles, des batailles, des jurons de tous les pays,
des cris fous dans toutes les langues, des couteaux qu'on degaine,
la garde qui monte, de l'argent qui manque!...

C'est au milieu de ces saturnales que le grand Tartarin etait
venu s'egarer un soir, pour chercher l'oubli et la paix de coeur.

[10]Le heros s'en allait seul, dans la foule, pensant a sa Mauresque,
quand tout a coup, a une table de jeu, par-dessus les
cris, le bruit de l'or, deux voix irritees s'eleverent:

"Je vous dis qu'il me manque vingt francs, M'sieu!...

--M'sieu!...

[15]--Apres?... M'sieu!...

--Apprenez a qui vous parlez, M'sieu!

--Je ne demande pas mieux, M'sieu!

--Je suis le prince Gregory du Montenegro, M'sieu!..."

A ce nom Tartarin, tout emu, fendit la foule et vint se placer
[20]an premier rang, joyeux et fier de retrouver son prince, ce prince
montenegrin si poli dont il avait ebauche la connaissance a bord
du paquebot....

Malheureusement, ce titre d'altesse, qui avait tant ebloui le
bon Tarasconnais, ne produisit pas la moindre impression sur
[25]l'officier de chasseurs avec qui le prince avait son algarade.

"Me voila bien avance...." fit le militaire en ricanant; puis
se tournant vers la galerie: "Gregory du Montenegro ... qui
connait ca?... Personne!"

Tartarin indigne fit un pas en avant.

[30]"Pardon ... je connais le _preince!_" dit-il d'une voix tres
ferme, et de son plus bel accent tarasconnais.

L'officier de chasseurs le regarda un moment bien en face,
puis, levant les epaules:

Page 56

"Allons! c'est bon.... Partagez-vous les vingt francs qui
manquent et qu'il n'en soit plus question."

La-dessus il tourna le dos et se perdit dans la foule.

Le fougueux Tartarin voulait s'elancer derriere lui, mais le
[5]prince l'en empecha:

"Laissez ... j'en fais mon affaire."

Et, prenant le Tarasconnais par le bras, il l'entraina dehors
rapidement.

Des qu'ils furent sur la place, le prince Gregory du Montenegro
[10]se decouvrit, tendit la main a notre heros, et, se rappelant
vaguement son nom, commenca d'une voix vibrante:

"Monsieur Barbarin....

--Tartarin!" souffla l'autre timidement.

--Tartarin, Barbarin, n'importe!... Entre nous, maintenant,
[15]c'est a la vie, a la mort!"

Et le noble Montenegrin lui secoua la main avec une farouche
energie.... Vous pensez si le Tarasconnais etait fier.

"_Preince!... Preince!..._" repetait-il avec ivresse.

Un quart d'heure apres, ces deux messieurs etaient installes
[20]au restaurant des Platanes, agreable maison de nuit dont
les terrasses plongent sur la mer, et la, devant une forte
salade russe arrosee d'un joli vin de Crescia, on renoua
connaissance.

Vous ne pouvez rien imaginer de plus seduisant que ce prince
[25]montenegrin. Mince, fin, les cheveux crepus, frise au petit fer,
rase a la pierre ponce, constelle d'ordres bizarres, il avait l'oeil
fute, le geste calin et un accent vaguement italien qui lui donnait un
faux air de Mazarin sans moustaches; tres ferre d'ailleurs
sur les langues latines, et citant a tout propos Tacite,
[30]Horace et les Commentaires.

De vieille race hereditaire, ses freres l'avaient, parait-il, exile
des l'age de dix ans, a cause de ses opinions liberales, et depuis
il courait le monde pour son instruction et son plaisir, en Altesse

Page 57

philosophe.... Coincidence singuliere! Le prince avait passe
trois ans a Tarascon, et comme Tartarin s'etonnait de ne l'avoir
jamais rencontre au cercle ou sur I'Esplanade: "Je sortais
Peu...." fit l'Altesse d'un ton evasif. Et le Tarasconnais,
[5]par discretion, n'osa pas en demander davantage. Toutes ces
grandes existences out des cotes si mysterieux!...

En fin de compte, un tres bon prince, ce seigneur Gregory.
Tout en sirotant le vin rose de Crescia, il ecouta patiemment
Tartarin lui parler de sa Mauresque et meme il se fit fort, connaissant
[10]toutes ces dames, de la retrouver promptement.

On but sec et longtemps. On trinqua "aux dames d'Alger!
au Montenegro libre!..."

Dehors sous la terrasse, la mer roulait, et les vagues, dans
l'ombre, battaient la rive avec un bruit de draps mouilles qu'on
[15]secoue. L'air etait chaud, le ciel plein d'etoiles.

Dans les platanes, un rossignol chantait....

Ce fut Tartarin qui paya la note.


X


_Dis-moi le nom de ton pere, et je te dirai
le nom de cette fleur._


Parlez-moi des princes montenegrins pour lever lestement
la caille.

[20]Le lendemain de cette soiree aux Platanes, des le petit jour,
le prince Gregory etait dans la chambre du Tarasconnais.

"Vite, vite, habillez-vous.... Votre Mauresque est retrouvee....
Elle s'appelle Baia.... Vingt ans, jolie comme un coeur,
et deja veuve....

[25]--Veuve!... quelle chance!" fit joyeusement le brave
Tartarin, qui se mefiait des maris d'Orient.

"Oui, mais tres surveillee par son frere.

--Ah! diantre!...

Page 58

--Un Maure farouche qui vend des pipes au bazar
d'Orleans...."

Ici un silence.

"Bon!" reprit le prince, "vous n'etes pas homme a vous
[5]effrayer pour si peu; et puis on viendra peut-etre a bout de ce
forban en lui achetant quelques pipes.... Allons vite,
habillez-vous ... heureux coquin!"

Pale, emu, le coeur plein d'amour, le Tarasconnais sauta
de son lit et, boutonnant a la hate son vaste calecon de
[10]flanelle:

"Qu'est-ce qu'il faut que je fasse?

--Ecrire a la dame tout simplement, et lui demander un
rendez-vous!

--Elle sait donc le francais?..." fit d'un air desappointe
[15]le naif Tartarin qui revait d'Orient sans melange.

"Elle n'en sait pas un mot," repondit le prince imperturbablement....
"mais vous allez me dicter la lettre, et je traduirai
a mesure.

--O prince, que de bontes!"

[20]Et le Tarasconnais se mit a marcher a grands pas dans la
chambre, silencieux et se recueillant.

Vous pensez qu'on n'ecrit pas a une Mauresque d'Alger
comme a une grisette de Beaucaire. Fort heureusement que
notre heros avait par devers lui ses nombreuses lectures qui
[25]lui permirent, en amalgamant la rhetorique apache des Indiens
de Gustave Aimard avec le _Voyage en Orient_ de Lamartine, et
quelques lointaines reminiscences du _Cantique des Cantiques_, de
composer la lettre la plus orientale qu'il se put voir. Cela
commencait par:

[30]"_Comme l'autruche dans les sables _...."

Et finissait par:

"_Dis-moi le nom de ton pere, et je te dirai le nom de cette
fleur _...."

Page 59

A cet envoi, le romanesque Tartarin aurait bien voulu joindre
un bouquet de fleurs emblematiques, a la mode orientale; mais
le prince Gregory pensa qu'il valait mieux acheter quelques pipes
chez le frere, ce qui ne manquerait pas d'adoucir l'humeur
[5]sauvage du monsieur et ferait certainement tres grand plaisir a
la dame, qui fumait beaucoup.

"Allons vite acheter des pipes!" fit Tartarin plein d'ardeur.

"Non!... non!... Laissez-moi y aller seul. Je les aurai
a meilleur compte....

[10]--Comment! vous voulez ... O prince ... prince...."
Et le brave homme, tout confus, tendit sa bourse a l'obligeant
Montenegrin, en lui recommandant de ne rien negliger pour
que la dame fut contente.

Malheureusement l'affaire--quoique bien lancee--ne marcha
[15]pas aussi vite qu'on aurait pu l'esperer. Tres touchee,
parait-il, de l'eloquence de Tartarin et du reste aux trois quarts
seduite par avance, la Mauresque n'aurait pas mieux demande
que de le recevoir; mais le frere avait des scrupules, et, pour
les endormir, il fallut acheter des douzaines, des grosses, des
[20]cargaisons de pipes....

"Qu'est-ce que diable Baia peut faire de toutes ces pipes?"
se demandait parfois le pauvre Tartarin;--mais il payait quand
meme et sans lesiner.

Enfin, apres avoir achete des montagnes de pipes et repandu
[25]des flots de poesie orientale, on obtint un rendez-vous.

Je n'ai pas besoin de vous dire avec quels battements de coeur
le Tarasconnais s'y prepara, avec quel soin emu il tailla, lustra,
parfuma sa rude barbe de chasseur de casquettes, sans oublier
--car il faut tout prevoir--de glisser dans sa poche un casse-tete
[30]a pointes et deux ou trois revolvers.

Le prince, toujours obligeant, vint a ce premier rendez-vous
en qualite d'interprete. La dame habitait dans le haut de la
ville. Devant sa porte, un jeune Maure de treize a quatorze

Page 60

ans fumait des cigarettes. C'etait le fameux Ali, le frere en
question. En voyant arriver les deux visiteurs, il frappa deux
coups a la poterne et se retira discretement.

La porte s'ouvrit. Une negresse parut qui, sans dire un seul
[5]mot, conduisit ces messieurs a travers l'etroite cour interieure
dans une petite chambre fraiche ou la dame attendait, accoudee
sur un lit bas.... Au premier abord, elle parut au Tarasconnais
plus petite et plus forte que la Mauresque de l'omnibus.

Au fait, etait-ce bien la meme? Mais ce soupcon ne fit
[10]que traverser le cerveau de Tartarin comme un eclair.

La dame etait si jolie ainsi avec ses pieds nus, ses doigts
grassouillets charges de bagues, rose, fine, et sous son corselet
de drap dore, sous les ramages de sa robe a fleurs laissant deviner
une aimable personne un peu boulotte, friande a point, et
[15]ronde de partout....Le tuyau d'ambre d'un narghile fumait
a ses levres et l'enveloppait toute d'une gloire de fumee blonde.

En entrant, le Tarasconnais posa une main sur son coeur, et
s'inclina le plus mauresquement possible, en roulant de gros
yeux passionnes.... Baia le regarda un moment sans
[20]dire; puis, lachant son tuyau d'ambre, se renversa en arriere,
cacha sa tete dans ses mains, et I'on ne vit plus que son cou
blanc qu'un fou rire faisait danser comme un sac rempli de
perles.


XI


_Sidi Tart'ri ben Tart'ri._


Si vous entriez, un soir, a la veillee, chez les cafetiers algeriens
[25]de la ville haute, vous entendriez encore aujourd'hui les Maures
causer entre eux, avec des clignements d'yeux et de petits rires,
d'un certain Sidi Tart'ri ben Tart'ri, Europeen aimable et riche
qui--voici quelques annees deja--vivait dans les hauts quartiers
avec une petite dame du cru appelee Baia.

Page 61

Le Sidi Tart'ri en question qui a laisse de si gais souvenirs
autour de la Casbah n'est autre, on le devine, que notre Tartarin....

Qu'est-ce que vous voulez? Il y a comme cela, dans la vie
[5]des saints et des heros, des heures d'aveuglement, de trouble,
de defaillance. L'illustre Tarasconnais n'en fut pas plus exempt
qu'un autre, et c'est pourquoi--deux mois durant--oublieux
des lions et de la gloire, il se grisa d'amour oriental et s'endormit,
comme Annibal a Capoue, dans les delices d'Alger la Blanche.

[10]Le brave homme avait loue au coeur de la ville arabe une
jolie maisonnette indigene avec cour interieure, bananiers, galeries
fraiches et fontaines. Il vivait la loin de tout bruit en compagnie
de sa Mauresque, Maure lui-meme de la tete aux pieds,
soufflant tout le jour dans son narghile, et mangeant des confitures
[15]au musc.

Etendue sur un divan en face de lui, Baia, la guitare au poing,
nasillait des airs monotones, ou bien pour distraire son seigneur
elle mimait la danse du ventre, en tenant a la main un petit
miroir dans lequel elle mirait ses dents blanches et se faisait
[20]des mines.

Comme la dame ne savait pas un mot de francais ni Tartarin
un mot d'arabe, la conversation languissait quelquefois, et le bavard
Tarasconnais avait tout le temps de faire penitence pour
les intemperances de langage dont il s'etait rendu coupable a la
[25]pharmacie Bezuquet ou chez l'armurier Costecalde.

Mais cette penitence meme ne manquait pas de charme, et
c'etait comme un spleen voluptueux qu'il eprouvait a rester la
tout le jour sans parler, en ecoutant le glouglou du narghile, le
frolement de la guitare et le bruit leger de la fontaine dans les
[30]mosaiques de la cour.

Le narghile, le bain, l'amour remplissaient toute sa vie. On
sortait peu. Quelquefois Sidi Tart'ri, sa dame en croupe, s'en
allait sur une brave mule manger des grenades a un petit

Page 62

jardin qu'il avait achete aux environs.... Mais jamais, au
grand jamais, il ne descendait dans la ville europeenne. Avec
ses zouaves en ribotte, ses alcazars bourres d'officiers, et son
eternel bruit de sabres trainant sous les arcades, cet Alger-la
[5]lui semblait insupportable et laid comme un corps de garde
d'Occident.

En somme, le Tarasconnais etait tres heureux. Tartarin-Sancho surtout,
tres friand de patisseries turques, se declarait
on ne peut plus satisfait de sa nouvelle existence....
[10]Tartarin-Quichotte, lui, avait bien par-ci par-la quelques remords,
en pensant a Tarascon et aux peaux promises.... Mais cela ne durait
pas, et pour chasser ces tristes idees il suffisait d'un regard de
Baia ou d'une cuilleree de ses diaboliques confitures odorantes
et troublantes comme les breuvages de Circe.

[15]Le soir, le prince Gregory venait parler un peu du Montenegro
libre.... D'une complaisance infatigable, cet aimable
seigneur remplissait dans la maison les fonctions d'interprete,
au besoin meme celles d'intendant, et tout cela pour rien, pour
le plaisir.... A part lui, Tartarin ne recevait que des _Teurs._
[20]Tous ces forbans a tetes farouches, qui naguere lui faisaient
tant de peur du fond de leurs noires echoppes, se trouverent
etre, une fois qu'il les connut, de bons commercants inoffensifs,
des brodeurs, des marchands d'epices, des tourneurs de tuyaux
de pipes, tous gens bien eleves, humbles, finauds, discrets et de
[25]premiere force a la bouillotte. Quatre ou cinq fois par semaine,
ces messieurs venaient passer la soiree chez Sidi Tart'ri, lui
gagnaient son argent, lui mangeaient ses confitures, et sur le
coup de dix heures se retiraient discretement en remerciant
le Prophete.

[30]Derriere eux, Sidi Tart'ri et sa fidele epouse finissaient la
soiree sur leur terrasse, une grande terrasse blanche qui faisait
toit a la maison et dominait la ville. Tout autour, un millier
d'autres terrasses blanches aussi, tranquilles sous le clair de lune,

Page 63

descendaient en s'echelonnant jusqu'a la mer. Des fredons de
guitare arrivaient, portes par la brise.

....Soudain, comme un bouquet d'etoiles, une grande melodie
claire s'egrenait doucement dans le ciel, et, sur le minaret de la
[5]mosquee voisine, un beau muezzin apparaissait, decoupant son
ombre blanche dans le bleu profond de la nuit, et chantant
la gloire d'Allah avec une voix merveilleuse qui remplissait
l'horizon.

Aussitot Baia lachait sa guitare, et ses grands yeux tournes
[10]vers le muezzin semblaient boire la priere avec delices. Tant
que le chant durait, elle restait la, frissonnante, extasiee, comme
une sainte Therese d'Orient.... Tartarin, tout emu, la regardait
prier et pensait en lui-meme que c'etait une forte et belle
religion, celle qui pouvait causer des ivresses de foi pareilles.

[15]Tarascon, voile-toi la face! ton Tartarin songeait a se faire
renegat.


XII


_On nous ecrit de Tarascon._


Par une belle apres-midi de ciel bleu et de brise tiede, Sidi
Tart'ri a califourchon sur sa mule revenait tout seulet de son
petit clos.... Les jambes ecartees par de larges coussins en
[20]sparterie que gonflaient les cedrats et les pasteques, berce au
bruit de ses grands etriers et suivant de tout son corps le
_balin-balan_ de la bete, le brave homme s'en allait ainsi dans un
paysage adorable, les deux mains croisees sur son ventre, aux trois
quarts assoupi par le bien etre et la chaleur.

[25]Tout a coup, en entrant dans la ville, un appel formidable le
reveilla.

"He! monstre de sort! on dirait monsieur Tartarin."

A ce nom de Tartarin, a cet accent joyeusement meridional,
le Tarasconnais leva la tete et apercut a deux pas de lui la

Page 64

brave figure tannee de maitre Barbassou, le capitaine du
_Zouave_, qui prenait l'absinthe en fumant sa pipe sur la porte
d'un petit cafe.

"He! adieu, Barbassou," fit Tartarin en arretant sa mule.

[5]Au lieu de lui repondre, Barbassou le regarda un moment
avec de grands yeux; puis, le voila parti a rire, a rire tellement,
Que Sidi Tart'ri en resta tout interloque, le derriere sur
ses pasteques.

"Que turban, mon pauvre monsieur Tartarin!... C'est
[10]donc vrai ce qu'on dit, que vous vous etes fait _Teur?..._
Et la petite Baia, est-ce qu'elle chante toujours _Marco la Belle?_

--_Marco la Belle! _" fit Tartarin indigne.... "Apprenez,
capitaine, que la personne dont vous parlez est une honnete
fille maure, et qu'elle ne sait pas un mot de francais.

[15]--Baia, pas un mot de francais?... D'ou sortez-vous
donc?..."

Et le brave capitaine se remit a rire plus fort.

Puis voyant la mine du pauvre Sidi Tart'ri qui s'allongeait,
il se ravisa.

[20]"Au fait, ce n'est peut-etre pas la meme.... Mettons que
j'ai confondu. Seulement, voyez-vous, monsieur Tartarin, vous
ferez tout de meme bien de vous mefier des Mauresques algeriennes
et des princes du Montenegro!..."

Tartarin se dressa sur ses etriers, en faisant sa moue.

[25]"Le prince est mon ami, capitaine.

--Bon! bon! ne nous fachons pas.... Vous ne prenez pas
une absinthe? Non. Rien a faire dire au pays?... Non
plus.... Eh bien! alors, bon voyage.... A propos, collegue,
j'ai la du bon tabac de France, si vous en vouliez emporter
quelques pipes.... Prenez [30]donc! prenez donc! ca vous
fera du bien.... Ce sont vos sacres tabacs d'Orient qui vous
barbouillent les idees."

Page 65

La-dessus le capitaine retourna a son absinthe et Tartarin,
tout pensif, reprit au petit trot le chemin de sa maisonnette....
Bien que sa grande ame se refusat a rien en croire, les insinuations de
Barbassou l'avaient attriste, puis ces jurons du cru,
[5]l'accent de la-bas, tout cela eveillait en lui de vagues remords.

Au logis, il ne trouva personne. Baia etait au bain.... La
negresse lui parut laide, la maison triste.... En proie a une
indefinissable melancolie, il vint s'asseoir pres de la fontaine et
bourra une pipe avec le tabac de Barbassou. Ce tabac etait
[10]enveloppe dans un fragment du _Semaphore_. En le deployant,
le nom de sa ville natale lui sauta aux yeux.

_On nous ecrit de Tarascon:_

"La ville est dans les transes. Tartarin, le tueur de lions, parti
pour chasser les grands felins en Afrique, n'a pas donne de ses
[15]nouvelles depuis plusieurs mois.... Qu'est devenu notre heroique
compatriote?...  On ose a peine se le demander, quand on a connu
comme nous cette tete ardente, cette audace, ce besoin d'aventures....
A-t-il ete comme tant d'autres englouti dans le sable, ou bien est-il
tombe sous la dent meurtriere d'un de ces monstres de l'Atlas dont
[20]il avait promis les peaux a la municipalite?... Terrible incertitude!
Pourtant des marchands negres, venus a la foire de Beaucaire,
pretendent avoir rencontre en plein desert un Europeen dont le
signalement se rapportait au sien, et qui se dirigeait vers Tombouctou....
Dieu nous garde notre Tartarin!"

[25]Quand il lut cela, le Tarasconnais rougit, palit, frissonna. Tout
Tarascon lui apparut: le cercle, les chasseurs de casquettes, le
fauteuil vert chez Costecalde, et planant au-dessus comme un
aigle eploye, la formidable moustache du brave commandant
Bravida.

[30]Alors, de se voir la, comme il etait, lachement accroupi sur
sa natte, tandis qu'on le croyait en train de massacrer des fauves,
Tartarin de Tarascon eut honte de lui-meme et pleura.

Tout a coup le heros bondit:

"Au lion! au lion!"

Page 66

Et s'elancant dans le reduit poudreux ou dormaient la tente-abri,
la pharmacie, les conserves, la caisse d'armes, il les traina
au milieu de la cour.

Tartarin-Sancho venait d'expirer; il ne restait plus que
[5]Tartarin-Quichotte.

Le temps d'inspecter son materiel, de s'armer, de se harnacher,
de rechausser ses grandes bottes, d'ecrire deux mots au
prince pour lui confier Baia, le temps de glisser sous l'enveloppe
quelques billets bleus mouilles de larmes, et l'intrepide
[10]Tarasconnais roulait en diligence sur la route de Blidah,
laissant a la maison sa negresse stupefaite devant le narghile, le
turban, les babouches, toute la defroque musulmane de Sidi
Tart'ri qui trainait piteusement sous les petits trefles blancs
de la galerie....




TROISIEME EPISODE



CHEZ LES LIONS


I


_Les diligences deportees._


Page 67

C'etait une vieille diligence d'autrefois, capitonnee a l'ancienne
mode de drap gros bleu tout fane, avec ces enormes pompons
de laine reche qui, apres quelques heures de route, finissent par
vous faire des moxas dans le dos.... Tartarin de Tarascon
[5]avait un coin de la rotonde; il s'y installa de son mieux, et en
attendant de respirer les emanations musquees des grands felins
d'Afrique, le heros dut se contenter de cette bonne vieille odeur
de diligence, bizarrement composee de mille odeurs, hommes,
chevaux, femmes et cuir, victuailles et paille moisie.

[10]Il y avait de tout un peu dans cette rotonde. Un trappiste,
des marchands juifs, deux cocottes qui rejoignaient leur corps
--le 3e hussards,--un photographe d'Orleansville.... Mais, si
charmante et variee que fut la compagnie, le Tarasconnais n'etait
pas en train de causer et resta la tout pensif, le bras passe dans
[15]la brassiere, avec ses carabines entre ses genoux.... Son
depart precipite, les yeux noirs de Baia, la terrible chasse qu'il
allait entreprendre, tout cela lui troublait la cervelle, sans compter
qu'avec son bon air patriarcal, cette diligence europeenne,
retrouvee en pleine Afrique, lui rappelait vaguement le Tarascon
[20]de sa jeunesse, des courses dans la banlieue, de petits diners au
bord du Rhone, une foule de souvenirs....

Peu a peu la nuit tomba. Le conducteur alluma ses lanternes.... La
diligence rouillee sautait en criant sur ses vieux

Page 68

ressorts; les chevaux trottaient, les grelots tintaient.... De
temps en temps la-haut, sous la bache de l'imperiale, un terrible
bruit de ferraille.... C'etait le materiel de guerre.

Tartarin de Tarascon, aux trois quarts assoupi, resta un moment a regarder
[5]les voyageurs comiquement secoues par les
cahots, et dansant devant lui comme des ombres falottes, puis
ses yeux s'obscurcirent, sa pensee se voila, et il n'entendit plus
que tres vaguement geindre l'essieu des roues, et les flancs de
la diligence qui se plaignaient....

[10]Subitement, une voix, une voix de vieille fee, enrouee, cassee,
felee, appela le Tarasconnais par son nom: "Monsieur Tartarin!
monsieur Tartarin!

--Qui m'appelle?

--C'est moi, monsieur Tartarin; vous ne me reconnaissez
[15]pas?... Je suis la vieille diligence qui faisait--il y a vingt
ans--le service de Tarascon a Nimes.... Que de fois je vous
ai portes, vous et vos amis, quand vous alliez chasser les casquettes
du cote de Joncquieres ou de Bellegarde!... Je ne
vous ai pas remis d'abord, a cause de votre bonnet de _Teur_ et
[20]du corps que vous avez pris; mais sitot que vous vous etes mis
a ronfler, coquin de bon sort! je vous ai reconnu tout de suite.

--C'est bon! c'est bon!" fit le Tarasconnais un peu vexe.

Puis, se radoucissant:

--"Mais enfin, ma pauvre vieille, qu'est-ce que vous etes
[25]venue faire ici?

--Ah! mon bon monsieur Tartarin, je n'y suis pas venue
de mon plein gre, je vous assure.... Une fois que le chemin
de fer de Beaucaire a ete fini, ils ne m'ont plus trouvee bonne
a rien et ils m'ont envoyee en Afrique.... Et je ne suis pas
[30]la seule! presque toutes les diligences de France ont ete
deportees comme moi. On nous trouvait trop reactionnaires, et maintenant
nous voila toutes ici a mener une vie de galere.... C'est ce qu'en France
vous appelez les chemins de fer algeriens."

Page 69

Ici la vieille diligence poussa un long soupir; puis elle reprit:

"Ah! monsieur Tartarin, que je le regrette, mon beau Tarascon!
C'etait alors le bon temps pour moi, le temps de la jeunesse!
il fallait me voir partir le matin, lavee a grande eau et
[5]toute luisante avec mes roues vernissees a neuf, mes lanternes
qui semblaient deux soleils et ma bache toujours frottee d'huile!
C'est ca qui etait beau quand le postillon faisait claquer son
fouet sur l'air de: _Lagadigadeou, la Tarasque! la Tarasque!_
et que le conducteur, son piston en bandouliere, sa casquette
[10]brodee sur l'oreille, jetant d'un tour de bras son petit chien,
toujours furieux, sur la bache de l'imperiale, s'elancait lui-meme
la-haut, en criant: "Allume! allume!" Alors mes quatre chevaux
s'ebranlaient au bruit des grelots, des aboiements, des fanfares,
les fenetres s'ouvraient, et tout Tarascon regardait avec
[15]orgueil la diligence detaler sur la grande route royale.

Quelle belle route, monsieur Tartarin, large, bien entretenue,
avec ses bornes kilometriques, ses petits tas de pierres regulierement
espaces, et de droite et de gauche ses jolies plaines
d'oliviers et de vignes.... Puis des auberges tous les dix pas,
[20]des relais toutes les cinq minutes.... Et mes voyageurs,
quelles braves gens! des maires et des cures qui allaient a
Nimes voir leur prefet ou leur eveque, de bons taffetassiers qui
revenaient du _mazet_ bien honnetement, des collegiens en vacances,
des paysans en blouse brodee tout frais rases du matin, et la-haut,
[25]sur l'imperiale, vous tous, messieurs les chasseurs de casquettes,
qui etiez toujours de si bonne humeur, et qui chantiez si bien
chacun _la votre_, le soir, aux etoiles, en revenant!...

Maintenant c'est une autre histoire.... Dieu sait les gens
que je charrie! un tas de mecreants venus je ne sais d'ou, qui
[30]me remplissent de vermine, des negres, des Bedouins, des soudards,
des aventuriers de tous les pays, des colons en guenilles
qui m'empestent de leurs pipes, et tout cela parlant un langage
auquel Dieu le pere ne comprendrait rien.... Et puis vous

Page 70

voyez comme on me traite! Jamais brossee, jamais lavee. On
me plaint le cambouis de mes essieux.... Au lieu de mes
gros bons chevaux tranquilles d'autrefois, de petits chevaux
arabes qui out le diable au corps, se battent, se mordent, dansent
[5]en courant comme des chevres, et me brisent mes brancards a
coups de pieds....  Aie!... aie!... tenez!... Voila que cela
Commence.... Et les routes! Par ici, c'est encore supportable,
parce que nous sommes pres du gouvernement, mais la-bas,
plus rien, pas de chemin du tout. On va comme on peut,
[10]a travers monts et plaines, dans les palmiers nains, dans les
lentisques.... Pas un seul relais fixe. On arrete au caprice du
conducteur, tantot dans une ferme, tantot dans une autre.

Quelquefois ce polisson-la me fait faire un detour de deux
lieues pour aller chez un ami boire l'absinthe ou le _champoreau_....
[15]Apres quoi, fouette, postillon! il faut rattraper le
temps perdu. Le soleil cuit, la poussiere brule. Fouette toujours!
On accroche, on verse! Fouette plus fort! On passe des rivieres
a la nage, on s'enrhume, on se mouille, on se noie.... Fouette!
fouette! fouette!... Puis le soir, toute ruisselante,--c'est
[20]cela qui est bon a mon age, avec mes rhumatismes!...--il
me faut coucher a la belle etoile, dans une cour de caravanserail
ouverte a tous les vents. La nuit, des chacals, des hyenes
viennent flairer mes caissons, et les maraudeurs qui craignent la
rosee se mettent au chaud dans mes compartiments.... Voila
[25]la vie que je mene, mon pauvre monsieur Tartarin, et je la
menerai jusqu'an jour ou, brulee par le soleil, pourrie par les
nuits humides, je tomberai--ne pouvant plus faire autrement
--sur un coin de mechante route, ou les Arabes feront bouillir
leur kousskouss avec les debris de ma vieille carcasse....

[30]--Blidah! Blidah!" fit le conducteur en ouvrant la portiere.



CHEZ LES LIONS


II


_ Ou l'on voit passer un petit monsieur._


Page 71

Vaguement, a travers les vitres depolies par la buee, Tartarin
de Tarascon entrevit une place de jolie sous-prefecture, place
reguliere, entouree d'arcades et plantee d'orangers, au milieu de
laquelle de petits soldats de plomb faisaient l'exercice dans la
[5]claire brume rose du matin. Les cafes otaient leurs volets. Dans
un coin, une halle avec des legumes.... C'etait charmant, mais
cela ne sentait pas encore le lion.

"Au sud!... Plus au sud!" murmura le bon Tartarin en
se renfoncant dans son coin.

[10]A ce moment, la portiere s'ouvrit. Une bouffee d'air
frais entra, apportant sur ses ailes, dans le parfum des orangers
fleuris, un tout petit monsieur en redingote noisette, vieux, sec,
ride, compasse, une figure grosse comme le poing, une cravate
en soie noire haute de cinq doigts, une serviette en cuir, un
[15]parapluie: le parfait notaire de village.

En apercevant le materiel de guerre du Tarasconnais, le petit
monsieur, qui s'etait assis en face, parut excessivement surpris
et se mit a regarder Tartarin avec une insistance genante.

On detela, on attela, la diligence partit.... Le petit monsieur
[20]regardait toujours Tartarin.... A la fin le Tarasconnais
prit la mouche.

"Ca vous etonne?" fit-il en regardant a son tour le petit
monsieur bien en face.

"Non! Ca me gene," repondit l'autre fort tranquillement; et
[25]le fait est qu'avec sa tente-abri, son revolver, ses deux fusils dans
dans leur gaine, son couteau de chasse,--sans parler de sa corpulence
naturelle, Tartarin de Tarascon tenait beaucoup de place....

La reponse du petit monsieur le facha:

"Vous imaginez-vous par hasard que je vais aller au lion avec
[30]votre parapluie?" dit le grand homme fierement.

Page 72

Le petit monsieur regarda son parapluie, sourit doucement;
puis, toujours avec son meme flegme:

"Alors, monsieur, vous etes...?

--Tartarin de Tarascon, tueur de lions!"

[5]En prononcant ces mots, l'intrepide Tarasconnais secoua
comme une criniere le gland de sa _chechia_.

Il y eut dans la diligence un mouvement de stupeur.

Le trappiste se signa, les cocottes pousserent de petits cris
d'effroi, et le photographe d'Orleansville se rapprocha du tueur
[10]de lions, revant deja l'insigne honneur de faire sa photographie.

Le petit monsieur, lui, ne se deconcerta pas.

"Est-ce que vous avez deja tue beaucoup de lions, monsieur
Tartarin?" demanda-t-il tres tranquillement.

Le Tarasconnais le recut de la belle maniere:

[15]"Si j'en ai beaucoup tue, monsieur!... Je vous souhaiterais
d'avoir seulement autant de cheveux sur la tete."

Et toute la diligence de rire en regardant les trois cheveux
jaunes de Cadet-Roussel qui se herissaient sur le crane du petit
monsieur.

[20]A son tour le photographe d'Orleansville prit la parole:

"Terrible profession que la votre, monsieur Tartarin!...
On passe quelquefois de mauvais moments.... Ainsi ce pauvre
M. Bombonnel....

--Ah! oui, le tueur de pantheres ..." fit Tartarin assez
[25]dedaigneusement.

"Est-ce que vous le connaissez?" demanda le petit monsieur.

"Te! pardi.... Si je le connais.... Nous avons chasse
plus de vingt fois ensemble."

Le petit monsieur sourit: "Vous chassez donc la panthere
[30]aussi, monsieur Tartarin?

--Quelquefois, par passe-temps, ..." fit l'enrage Tarasconnais.
Il ajouta, en relevant la tete d'un geste heroique qui enflamma
le coeur des deux cocottes:

"Ca ne vaut pas le lion!

Page 73

--En somme," hasarda le photographe d'Orleansville, "une
panthere, ce n'est qu'un gros chat....

--Tout juste!" fit Tartarin qui n'etait pas fache de rabaisser
un peu la gloire de Bombonnel, surtout devant des dames.

[5]Ici la diligence s'arreta, le conducteur vint ouvrir la portiere
et s'adressant au petit vieux:

"Vous voila arrive, monsieur," lui dit-il d'un air tres respectueux.

Le petit monsieur se leva, descendit, puis avant de refermer
[10]la portiere:

"Voulez-vous me permettre de vous donner un conseil, monsieur
Tartarin?

--Lequel, monsieur?

--Ma foi! ecoutez, vous avez I'air d'un brave homme, j'aime
[15]mieux vous dire ce qu'il en est.... Retournez vite a Tarascon,
monsieur Tartarin.... Vous perdez votre temps ici.... Il
reste bien encore quelques pantheres dans la province; mais,
fi donc! c'est un trop petit gibier pour vous.... Quant aux
lions, c'est fini. Il n'en reste plus en Algerie ... mon ami
[20]Chassaing vient de tuer le dernier."

Sur quoi le petit monsieur salua, ferma la portiere, et s'en
alla en riant avec sa serviette et son parapluie.

"Conducteur," demanda Tartarin en faisant sa moue,
"qu'est-ce que c'est donc que ce bonhomme-la?

--Comment! vous ne le connaissez pas? mais c'est monsieur
[25]Bombonnel."


III


_Un couvent de lions._


A Milianah, Tartarin de Tarascon descendit, laissant la
diligence continuer sa route vers le Sud.

Deux jours de durs cahots, deux nuits passees les yeux ouverts
[30]a regarder par la portiere s'il n'apercevrait pas dans les

Page 74

champs, au bord de la route, l'ombre formidable du lion, tant
d'insomnies meritaient bien quelques heures de repos. Et puis,
s'il faut tout dire, depuis sa mesaventure avec Bombonnel, le
loyal Tarasconnais se sentait mal a l'aise, malgre ses armes,
[5]sa moue terrible, son bonnet rouge, devant le photographe
d'Orleansville et les deux demoiselles du 3eme hussards.

Il se dirigea donc a travers les larges rues de Milianah, pleines
de beaux arbres et de fontaines, mais, tout en cherchant un
hotel a sa convenance, le pauvre homme ne pouvait s'empecher
[10]de songer aux paroles de Bombonnel.... Si c'etait vrai pourtant?
S'il n'y avait plus de lions en Algerie?... A quoi bon
alors tant de courses, tant de fatigues?...

Soudain, au detour d'une rue, notre heros se trouva face a
face ... avec qui? Devinez.... Avec un lion superbe, qui
[15]attendait devant la porte d'un cafe, assis royalement sur son
train de derriere, sa criniere fauve dans le soleil.

"Qu'est ce qu'ils me disaient donc qu'il n'y en avait plus?"
s'ecria le Tarasconnais en faisant un saut en arriere.... En
entendant cette exclamation, le lion baissa la tete et, prenant
[20]dans sa gueule une sebile en bois posee devant lui sur le trottoir,
il la tendit humblement du cote de Tartarin immobile de
Stupeur.... Un Arabe qui passait jeta un gros sou dans la
sebile, le lion remua la queue.... Alors Tartarin comprit
tout. Il vit, ce que l'emotion l'avait d'abord empeche de voir, la
[25]foule attroupee autour du pauvre lion aveugle et apprivoise, et
les deux grands negres armes de gourdins qui le promenaient a
travers la ville comme un Savoyard sa marmotte.

Le sang du Tarasconnais ne fit qu'un tour "Miserables,"
cria-t-il d'une voix de tonnerre, "ravaler ainsi ces nobles betes!"

[30]Et, s'elancant sur le lion, il lui arracha l'immonde sebile d'entre
ses royales machoires.... Les deux negres, croyant avoir
affaire a un voleur, se precipiterent sur le Tarasconnais, la
matraque haute.... Ce fut une terrible bousculade.... Les

Page 75

negres tapaient, les femmes piaillaient, les enfants riaient. Un
vieux cordonnier juif criait du fond de sa boutique. "_Au zouge
de paix! Au zouge de paix!_" Le lion lui-meme, dans sa nuit,
essaya d'un rugissement, et le malheureux Tartarin, apres une
[5]lutte desesperee, roula par terre au milieu des gros sous et des
balayures.

A ce moment, un homme fendit la foule, ecarta les negres
d'un mot, les femmes et les enfants d'un geste, releva Tartarin,
le brossa, le secoua, et l'assit tout essouffle sur une borne.

[10]"Comment! _preince_, c'est vous?..." fit le bon Tartarin
en se frottant les cotes.

"Eh! oui, mon vaillant ami, c'est moi.... Sitot votre lettre
recue, j'ai confie Baia a son frere, loue une chaise de poste, fait
cinquante lieues ventre a terre, et me voila juste a temps pour
[15]vous arracher a la brutalite de ces rustres.... Qu'est-ce que
vous avez donc fait, juste Dieu! pour vous attirer cette mechante
affaire?

--Que voulez vous, _preince_?... De voir ce malheureux
lion avec sa sebile aux dents, humilie, vaincu, bafoue, servant de
[20]risee a toute cette pouillerie musulmane....

--Mais vous vous trompez, mon noble ami. Ce lion est, au
contraire, pour eux un objet de respect et d'adoration. C'est
une bete sacree, qui fait partie d'un grand couvent de lions,
fonde, il y a trois cents ans, par Mahommed-ben-Aouda, une
[25]espece de Trappe formidable et farouche, pleine de rugissements
et d'odeurs de fauve, ou des moines singuliers elevent et apprivoisent
des lions par centaines, et les envoient de la dans toute
l'Afrique septentrionale, accompagnes de freres queteurs....
Les dons que recoivent les freres servent a l'entretien du couvent
[30]et de sa mosquee, et si les deux negres ont montre tant d'humeur
tout a l'heure, c'est qu'ils out la conviction que pour un
sou, un seul sou de la quete, vole ou perdu par leur faute, le lion
qu'ils conduisent les devorerait immediatement."

Page 76

En ecoutant ce recit invraisemblable et pourtant veridique,
Tartarin de Tarascon se delectait et reniflait l'air bruyamment.

"Ce qui me va dans tout ceci," fit-il en matiere de conclusion,
"c'est que, n'en deplaise a mons Bombonnel, il y a encore des
[5]lions en Algerie!...

--S'il y en a!" dit le prince avec enthousiasme.... "Des
demain, nous allons battre la plaine du Cheliff, et vous verrez!....

--Eh quoi! Prince.... Auriez-vous l'intention de chasser,
vous aussi?

[10]--Parbleu! pensez-vous donc que je vous laisserais vous en
aller seul en pleine Afrique, au milieu de ces tribus feroces dont
vous ignorez la langue et les usages.... Non! non! illustre
Tartarin, je ne vous quitte plus.... Partout ou vous serez, je
veux etre.

[15]--Oh! _preince, preince_...."

Et Tartarin, radieux, pressa sur son coeur le vaillant Gregory,
en songeant avec fierte qu'a l'exemple de Jules Gerard, de
Bombonnel et tous les autres fameux tueurs de lions, il allait
avoir un prince etranger pour l'accompagner dans ses chasses.


IV


_La caravane en marche._


[20]Le lendemain, des la premiere heure, l'intrepide Tartarin
et le non moins intrepide prince Gregory, suivis d'une demi-douzaine
de portefaix negres, sortaient de Milianah et descendaient
vers la plaine du Cheliff par un raidillon delicieux tout
ombrage de jasmins, de tuyas, de caroubiers, d'oliviers sauvages,
[25]entre deux haies de petits jardins indigenes et des milliers
de joyeuses sources vives qui degringolaient de roche en roche
en chantant.... Un paysage du Liban.

Aussi charge d'armes que le grand Tartarin, le prince Gregory
s'etait en plus affuble d'un magnifique et singulier kepi tout

Page 77

galonne d'or, avec une garniture de feuilles de chene brodees
au fil d'argent, qui donnait a Son Altesse un faux air de general
mexicain, ou de chef de gare des bords du Danube.

Ce diable de kepi intriguait beaucoup le Tarasconnais, et
[5]comme il demandait timidement quelques explications:

"Coiffure indispensable pour voyager en Afrique," repondit
le prince avec gravite, et tout en faisant reluire sa visiere d'un
revers de manche, il renseigna son naif compagnon sur le role
important que joue le kepi dans nos relations avec les Arabes,
[10]la terreur que cet insigne militaire a, seul, le privilege de leur
inspirer, si bien que l'administration civile a ete obligee de coiffer
tout son monde avec des kepis, depuis le cantonnier jusqu'au
receveur de l'enregistrement En somme, pour gouverner
l'Algerie--c'est toujours le prince qui parle--pas n'est besoin
[15]d'une forte tete, ni meme de tete du tout. Il suffit d'un kepi,
d'un beau kepi galonne, reluisant au bout d'une trique comme
la toque de Gessler.

Ainsi causant et philosophant, la caravane allait son train.
Les portefaix--pieds nus--sautaient de roche en roche avec
[20]des cris de singes. Les caisses d'armes sonnaient. Les fusils
flambaient. Les indigenes qui passaient s'inclinaient jusqu'a
terre devant le kepi magique.... La haut, sur les remparts
de Milianah, le chef du bureau arabe, qui se promenait au bon
frais avec sa dame, entendant ces bruits insolites, et voyant des
[25]armes luire entre les branches, crut a un coup de main, fit
baisser le pont-levis, battre la generale, et mit incontinent la
ville en etat de siege.

Beau debut pour la caravane!

Malheureusement, avant la fin du jour, les choses se gaterent.
[30]Des negres qui portaient les bagages, l'un fut pris d'atroces
coliques pour avoir mange le sparadrap de la pharmacie. Un
autre tomba sur le bord de la route ivre mort d'eau-de-vie camphree.
Le troisieme, celui qui portait l'album de voyage, seduit

Page 78

par les dorures des fermoirs, et persuade qu'il enlevait les tresors
de la Mecque, se sauva dans le Zaccar a toutes jambes.... Il
fallut aviser.... La caravane fit halte, et tint conseil dans
l'ombre trouee d'un vieux figuier.

[5]Je serais d'avis, dit le prince, en essayant, mais sans succes,
de delayer une tablette de pemmican dans une casserole perfectionnee
a triple fond, je serais d'avis que, des ce soir, nous
renoncions aux porteurs negres.... Il y a precisement un
marche arabe tout pres d'ici. Le mieux est de nous y arreter,
[10]et de faire emplette de quelques bourriquots....

--Non!... non!... pas de bourriquots!..." interrompit
vivement le grand Tartarin, que le souvenir de Noiraud
avait fait devenir tout rouge.

Et il ajouta, l'hypocrite:

[15]"Comment voulez-vous que de si petites betes puissent porter
tout notre attirail?"

Le prince sourit.

"C'est ce qui vous trompe, mon illustre ami. Si maigre et
si chetif qu'il vous paraisse, le bourriquot algerien a les reins
[20]solides.... Il le faut bien pour supporter tout ce qu'il supporte....
Demandez plutot aux Arabes. Voici comment ils
expliquent notre organisation coloniale.... En haut, disent-ils,
il y a _mouci_ le gouverneur, avec une grande trique, qui tape sur
l'etat-major; l'etat-major, pour se venger, tape sur le soldat; le
[25]soldat tape sur le colon, le colon tape sur l'Arabe, l'Arabe tape
sur le negre, le negre tape sur le juif, le juif a son tour tape
sur le bourriquot; et le pauvre petit bourriquot, n'ayant personne
sur qui taper, tend l'echine et porte tout. Vous voyez
bien qu'il peut porter vos caisses.

[30]--C'est egal," reprit Tartarin de Tarascon, "je trouve que,
pour le coup d'oeil de notre caravane, des anes ne feraient pas
tres bien.... Je voudrais quelque chose de plus oriental....
Ainsi, par exemple, si nous pouvions avoir un chameau....

Page 79

--Tant que vous en voudrez," fit l'Altesse, et l'on se mit en
route pour le marche arabe.

Le marche se tenait a quelques kilometres, sur les bords du
Cheliff.... Il y avait la cinq ou six mille Arabes en guenilles,
[5]grouillant au soleil, et trafiquant bruyamment au milieu des
jarres d'olives noires, des pots de miel, des sacs d'epices et
des cigares en gros tas, de grands feux ou rotissaient des
moutons entiers, ruisselant de beurre, des boucheries en plein
air, ou des negres tout nus, les pieds dans le sang, les bras
[10]rouges, depecaient, avec de petits couteaux, des chevreaux
pendus a une perche.

Dans un coin, sous une tente rapetassee de mille couleurs,
un greffier maure, avec un grand livre et des lunettes. Ici, un
groupe, des cris de rage: c'est un jeu de roulette, installe sur
[15]une mesure a ble, et des Kabyles, qui s'eventrent autour....
La-bas, des trepignements, une joie, des rires: c'est un marchand
juif avec sa mule, qu'on regarde se noyer dans le Cheliff....
Puis des scorpions, des chiens, des corbeaux, et des mouches!...
des mouches!...

[20]Par exemple, les chameaux manquaient. On finit pourtant
par en decouvrir un, dont des M'zabites cherchaient a se defaire.
C'etait le vrai chameau du desert, le chameau classique, chauve,
l'air triste, avec sa longue tete de bedouin et sa bosse qui, devenue
flasque par suite de trop longs jeunes, pendait melancoliquement
[25]sur le cote.

Tartarin le trouva si beau, qu'il voulut que la caravane entiere
montat dessus.... Toujours la folie orientale!...

La bete s'accroupit. On sangla les malles.

Le prince s'installa sur le cou de l'animal. Tartarin, pour plus
[30]de majeste, se fit hisser tout en haut de la bosse, entre deux
caisses; et la, fier et bien cale, saluant d'un geste noble tout le
marche accouru, il donna le signal du depart.... Tonnerre!
si ceux de Tarascon avaient pu le voir!...

Page 80

Le chameau se redressa, allongea ses grandes jambes a noeuds,
et prit son vol....

O stupeur! Au bout de quelques enjambees, voila Tartarin
qui se sent palir, et l'heroique chechia qui reprend une a une ses
[5]anciennes positions du temps du _Zouave_. Ce diable de chameau
tanguait comme une fregate.

"_Preince, preince_," murmura Tartarin tout bleme, et s'accrochant
a l'etoupe seche de la bosse, "_preince_, descendons....
Je sens ... je sens ... que je vais faire bafouer la France...."

[10]Va te promener! le chameau etait lance, et rien ne pouvait
plus l'arreter. Quatre mille Arabes couraient derriere, pieds
nus, gesticulant, riant comme des fous, et faisant luire au soleil
six cent mille dents blanches....

Le grand homme de Tarascon dut se resigner. Il s'affaissa
[15]tristement sur la bosse. La chechia prit toutes les positions
qu'elle voulut ... et la France fut bafouee.


V


_L'affut du soir dans un bois de lauriers-roses._


Si pittoresque que fut leur nouvelle monture, nos tueurs de
lions durent y renoncer, par egard pour la chechia. On continua
donc la route a pied comme devant, et la caravane s'en alla
[20]tranquillement vers le Sud par petites etapes, le Tarasconnais
en tete, le Montenegrin en queue, et dans les rangs le chameau
avec les caisses d'armes.

L'expedition dura pres d'un mois.

Pendant un mois, cherchant des lions introuvables, le terrible
[25]Tartarin erra de douar en douar dans l'immense plaine du
Cheliff, a travers cette formidable et cocasse Algerie francaise,
ou les parfums du vieil Orient se compliquent d'une forte odeur
d'absinthe et de caserne, Abraham et Zouzou meles, quelque
chose de feerique et de naivement burlesque, comme une page

Page 81

de l'Ancien Testament racontee par le sergent La Ramee ou
le brigadier Pitou.... Curieux spectacle pour des yeux qui
auraient su voir.... Un peuple sauvage et pourri que nous
civilisons, en lui donnant nos vices.... L'autorite feroce et
[5]sans controle de bachagas fantastiques, qui se mouchent gravement
dans leurs grands cordons de la Legion d'honneur, et
pour un oui ou pour un non font batonner les gens sur la
plante des pieds. La justice sans conscience de cadis a grosses
lunettes, tartufes du Coran et de la loi, qui revent de quinze
[10]aout et de promotion sous les palmes, et vendent leurs arrets,
comme Esau son droit d'ainesse, pour un plat de lentilles ou de
kousskouss au sucre. Des caids libertins et ivrognes, anciens
brosseurs d'un general Yusuf quelconque, qui se soulent de
champagne avec des blanchisseuses mahonnaises, et font des
[15]ripailles de mouton roti, pendant que, devant leurs tentes, toute
la tribu creve de faim, et dispute aux levriers les rogatons de la
ribote seigneuriale.

Puis, tout autour, des plaines en friche, de l'herbe brulee,
des buissons chauves, des maquis de cactus et de lentisques, le
[20]grenier de la France!... Grenier vide de grains, helas! et
riche seulement en chacals et en punaises. Des douars abandonnes,
des tribus effarees qui s'en vont sans savoir ou, fuyant
la faim, et semant des cadavres le long de la route. De loin en
loin, un village francais, avec des maisons en ruine, des champs
[25]sans culture, des sauterelles enragees, qui mangent jusqu'aux
rideaux des fenetres, et tous les colons dans les cafes, en train
de boire de l'absinthe en discutant des projets de reforme et de
constitution.

Voila ce que Tartarin aurait pu voir, s'il s'en etait donne la
[30]peine, mais, tout entier a sa passion leonine, l'homme de Tarascon
allait droit devant lui, sans regarder ni a droite ni a
gauche, I'oeil obstinement fixe sur ces monstres imaginaires,
qui ne paraissaient jamais.

Page 82

Comme la tente-abri s'entetait a ne pas s'ouvrir et les tablettes
de pemmican a ne pas fondre, la caravane etait obligee de s'arreter
matin et soir dans les tribus. Partout, grace au kepi du
prince Gregory, nos chasseurs etaient recus a bras ouverts. Ils
[5]logeaient chez les agas, dans des palais bizarres, grandes fermes
blanches sans fenetres, ou l'on trouve pele-mele des narghiles
et des commodes en acajou, des tapis de Smyrne et des
lampes-moderateur, des coffres de cedre pleins de sequins turcs, et
des pendules a sujets, style Louis-Philippe.... Partout on donnait
[10]a Tartarin des fetes splendides, des _diffas,_ des _fantasias_....
En son honneur, des goums entiers faisaient parler la poudre et
luire leurs burnous au soleil. Puis, quand la poudre avait parle,
le bon aga venait et presentait sa note.... C'est ce qu'on
appelle l'hospitalite arabe.

[15]Et toujours pas de lions. Pas plus de lions que sur le Pont-Neuf!

Cependant le Tarasconnais ne se decourageait pas. S'enfoncant bravement
dans le Sud, il passait ses journees a battre
le maquis, fouillant les palmiers-nains du bout de sa carabine,
[20]et faisant "frrt! frrt!" a chaque buisson. Puis, tous les soirs
avant de se coucher, un petit affut de deux ou trois heures....

Peine perdue! le lion ne se montrait pas.

Un soir pourtant, vers les six heures, comme la caravane traversait
un bois de lentisques tout violet ou de grosses cailles
[25]alourdies par la chaleur sautaient ca et la dans l'herbe, Tartarin
de Tarascon crut entendre--mais si loin, mais si vague, mais
si emiette par la brise--ce merveilleux rugissement qu'il avait
entendu tant de fois la-has a Tarascon, derriere la baraque
Mitaine.

[30]D'abord le heros croyait rever.... Mais au bout d'un instant,
lointains toujours, quoique plus distincts, les rugissements
recommencerent; et cette fois, tandis qu'a tous les coins de
l'horizon on entendait hurler les chiens des douars,--secouee

Page 83

par la terreur et faisant retentir les conserves et les caisses
d'armes, la bosse du chameau frissonna.

Plus de doute. C'etait le lion.... Vite, vite, a l'affut. Pas
une minute a perdre.

[5]Il y avait tout juste pres de la un vieux _marabout_ (tombeau
de saint) a coupole blanche, avec les grandes pantoufles jaunes
du defunt deposees dans une niche au-dessus de la porte, et
un fouillis d'ex-voto bizarres, pans de burnous, fils d'or, cheveux
roux, qui pendaient le long des murailles.... Tartarin
[10]de Tarascon y remisa son prince et son chameau et se mit en
quete d'un affut. Le prince Gregory voulait le suivre, mais le
Tarasconnais s'y refusa; il tenait a affronter le lion seul a seul.
Toutefois il recommanda a Son Altesse de ne pas s'eloigner, et,
par mesure de precaution, il lui confia son portefeuille, un gros
[15]portefeuille plein de papiers precieux et de billets de banque,
qu'il craignait de faire ecornifler par la griffe du lion. Ceci fait,
le heros chercha son poste.

Cent pas en avant du marabout, un petit bois de lauriers-roses
tremblait dans la gaze du crepuscule, au bord d'une riviere
[20]presque a sec. C'est la que Tartarin vint s'embusquer, le genou
en terre, selon la formule, la carabine au poing et son grand
couteau de chasse plante fierement devant lui dans le sable de
la berge.

La nuit arriva. Le rose de la nature passa au violet, puis
[25]au bleu sombre.... En bas, dans les cailloux de la riviere,
luisait comme un miroir a main une petite flaque d'eau claire.
C'etait l'abreuvoir des fauves. Sur la pente de l'autre berge,
on voyait vaguement le sentier blanc que leurs grosses pattes
avaient trace dans les lentisques. Cette pente mysterieuse
[30]donnait le frisson. Joignez a cela le fourmillement vague des
nuits africaines, branches frolees, pas de velours d'animaux
rodeurs, aboiements greles des chacals, et la-haut, dans le ciel,
a cent, deux cents metres, de grands troupeaux de grues qui

Page 84

passent avec des cris d'enfants qu'on egorge; vous avouerez
qu'il y avait de quoi etre emu.

Tartarin l'etait. Il l'etait meme beaucoup. Les dents lui claquaient,
le pauvre homme! Et sur la garde de son couteau de
[5]chasse plante en terre le canon de son fusil raye sonnait comme
une paire de castagnettes.... Qu'est-ce que vous voulez! Il
y a des soirs ou l'on n'est pas en train, et puis ou serait le
merite, si les heros n'avaient jamais peur....

Eh bien! oui, Tartarin eut peur, et tout le temps encore.
[10]Neanmoins, il tint bon une heure, deux heures, mais l'heroisme
a ses limites.... Pres de lui, dans le lit desseche de la
riviere, le Tarasconnais entend tout a coup un bruit de pas, des
cailloux qui roulent. Cette fois la terreur l'enleve de terre. Il
tire ses deux coups au hasard dans la nuit, et se replie a toutes
[15]jambes sur le marabout, laissant son coutelas debout dans le
sable comme une croix commemorative de la plus formidable
panique qui ait jamais assailli l'ame d'un dompteur d'hydres.

"A moi, preince ... le lion! ..."

Un silence.

[20]"Preince, preince, etes-vous la?"

Le prince n'etait pas la. Sur le mur blanc du marabout, le
bon chameau projetait seul au clair de lune l'ombre bizarre de
sa bosse.... Le prince Gregory venait de filer en emportant
portefeuille et billets de banque.... Il y avait un mois
[25]que Son Altesse attendait cette occasion....


VI


_Enfin!..._


Page 85

Le lendemain de cette aventureuse et tragique soiree,
lorsqu'au petit jour notre heros se reveilla, et qu'il eut acquis
la certitude que le prince et le magot etaient reellement partis,
partis sans retour, lorsqu'il se vit seul dans cette petite tombe
[5]blanche, trahi, vole, abandonne en pleine Algerie sauvage avec
un chameau a bosse simple et quelque monnaie de poche pour
toute ressource, alors, pour la premiere fois, le Tarasconnais
douta. Il douta du Montenegro, il douta de l'amitie, il douta
de la gloire, il douta meme des lions, et, comme le Christ a
[10]Gethsemani, le grand homme se prit a pleurer amerement.

Or, tandis qu'il etait la pensivement assis sur la porte du
marabout, sa tete dans ses deux mains, sa carabine entre ses
jambes, et le chameau qui le regardait, soudain le maquis d'en
face s'ecarte et Tartarin stupefait voit paraitre, a dix pas devant
[15]lui, un lion gigantesque s'avancant la tete haute et poussant des
rugissements formidables qui font trembler les murs du marabout
tout charges d'oripeaux et jusqu'aux pantoufles du saint
dans leur niche.

Seul, le Tarasconnais ne trembla pas.

[20]"Enfin!" cria-t-il en bondissant, la crosse a l'epaule....
Pan!... pan! pfft! pfft! C'etait fait.... Le lion avait deux
balles explosibles dans la tete.... Pendant une minute, sur le
fond embrase du ciel africain, ce fut un feu d'artifice epouvantable
de cervelle en eclats, de sang fumant et de toison rousse
[25]eparpillee. Puis tout retomba et Tartarin apercut ... deux
grands negres furieux qui couraient sur lui, la matraque en l'air.
Les deux negres de Milianah!

O misere! c'etait le lion apprivoise, le pauvre aveugle du
couvent de Mohammed que les balles tarasconnaises venaient
[30]d'abattre.

Page 86

Cette fois, par Mahom! Tartarin l'echappa belle. Ivres de
fureur fanatique, les deux negres queteurs l'auraient surement
mis en pieces, si le Dieu des chretiens n'avait envoye a son aide
[5]un ange liberateur, le garde champetre de la commune d'Orleansville
arrivant, son sabre sous le bras, par un petit sentier.

La vue du kepi municipal calma subitement la colere des
negres. Paisible et majestueux, l'homme a la plaque dressa proces-verbal
de l'affaire, fit charger sur le chameau ce qui restait du
lion, ordonna aux plaignants comme au delinquant de le suivre,
[10]et se dirigea sur Orleansville, ou le tout fut depose au greffe.

Ce fut une longue et terrible procedure!

Apres l'Algerie des tribus, qu'il venait de parcourir, Tartarin
de Tarascon connut alors une autre Algerie non moins cocasse
et formidable, l'Algerie des villes, processive et avocassiere. Il
[15]connut la judiciaire louche qui se tripote au fond des cafes, la
boheme des gens de loi, les dossiers qui sentent l'absinthe, les
cravates blanches mouchetees de _champoreau_; il connut les
huissiers, les agrees, les agents d'affaires, toutes ces sauterelles
du papier timbre affamees et maigres qui mangent le colon
[20]jusqu'aux tiges de ses bottes et le laissent dechiquete feuille
par feuille comme un plant de mais....

Avant tout il s'agissait de savoir si le lion avait ete tue sur
le territoire civil ou le territoire militaire. Dans le premier cas
l'affaire regardait le tribunal de commerce; dans le second,
[25]Tartarin relevait du conseil de guerre, et, a ce mot de conseil
de guerre, l'impressionnable Tarasconnais se voyait deja fusille
au pied des remparts, ou croupissant dans le fond d'un silo....

Le terrible, c'est que la delimitation des deux territoires est
tres vague en Algerie.... Enfin, apres un mois de courses,
[30]d'intrigues, de stations au soleil dans les cours des bureaux
arabes, il fut etabli que si d'une part le lion avait ete tue sur
le territoire militaire, d'autre part, Tartarin, lorsqu'il tira, se
trouvait sur le territoire civil. L'affaire se jugea donc au civil,

Page 87

et notre heros en fut quitte pour _deux mille cinq cents francs_
d'indemnite, sans les frais.

Comment faire pour payer tout cela? Les quelques piastres
echappees a la razzia du prince s'en etaient allees depuis longtemps
[5]en papiers legaux et en absinthes judiciaires.

Le malheureux tueur de lions fut donc reduit a vendre la
caisse d'armes au detail, carabine par carabine. Il vendit les
poignards, les kriss malais, les casse-tete.... Un epicier acheta
les conserves alimentaires. Un pharmacien, ce qui restait du
[10]sparadrap. Les grandes bottes elles-memes y passerent et
suivirent la tente-abri perfectionnee chez un marchand de
bric-a-brac, qui les eleva a la hauteur de curiosites cochinchinoises....
Une fois tout paye, il ne restait plus a Tartarin
que la peau du lion et le chameau. La peau, il l'emballa
[15]soigneusement et la dirigea sur Tarascon, a l'adresse du brave
commandant Bravida. (Nous verrons tout a l'heure ce qu'il
advint de cette fabuleuse depouille.) Quant au chameau, il
comptait s'en servir pour regagner Alger, non pas en montant
dessus, mais en le vendant pour payer la diligence, ce qui
[20]est encore la meilleure facon de voyager a chameau. Malheureusement
la bete etait d'un placement difficile, et personne
n'en offrit un liard.

Tartarin cependant voulait regagner Alger a toute force. Il
avait hate de revoir le corselet bleu de Baia, sa maisonnette, ses
[25]fontaines, et de se reposer sur les trefles blancs de son petit
cloitre, en attendant de l'argent de France. Aussi notre heros
n'hesita pas: et navre, mais point abattu, il entreprit de faire
la route a pied, sans argent, par petites journees.

En cette occurrence, le chameau ne l'abandonna pas. Cet
[30]etrange animal s'etait pris pour son maitre d'une tendresse
inexplicable, et, le voyant sortir d'Orleansville, se mit a marcher
religieusement derriere lui, reglant son pas sur le sien et ne le
quittant pas d'une semelle.

Page 88

Au premier moment, Tartarin trouva cela touchant, cette
fidelite, ce devouement a toute epreuve lui allaient au coeur,
d'autant que la bete etait commode et se nourrissait avec rien.
Pourtant, au bout de quelques jours, le Tarasconnais s'ennuya
[5]d'avoir perpetuellement sur les talons ce compagnon melancolique,
qui lui rappelait toutes ses mesaventures, puis, l'aigreur
s'en melant, il lui en voulut de son air triste, de sa bosse, de son
allure d'oie bridee. Pour tout dire, il le prit en grippe et ne
songea plus qu'a s'en debarrasser, mais l'animal tenait bon....
[10]Tartarin essaya de le perdre, le chameau le retrouva; il essaya
de courir, le chameau courut plus vite.... Il lui criait: "Va
t'en!" en lui jetant des pierres. Le chameau s'arretait et le regardait
d'un air triste, puis, au bout d'un moment, il se remettait
en route et finissait toujours par le rattraper. Tartarin dut se
[15]resigner.

Pourtant, lorsque apres huit grands jours de marche, le Tarasconnais
poudreux, harasse, vit de loin etinceler dans la verdure
les premieres terrasses blanches d'Alger, lorsqu'il se trouva
aux portes de la ville, sur l'avenue bruyante de Mustapha, an
[20]milieu des zouaves, des biskris, des Mahonnaises, tous grouillant
autour de lui et le regardant defiler avec son chameau, pour le
coup la patience lui echappa. "Non! non!" dit-il, "ce n'est
pas possible.... je ne peux pas entrer dans Alger avec un
animal pareil!" et, profitant d'un encombrement de voitures, il
[25]fit un crochet dans les champs et se jeta dans un fosse!

Au bout d'un moment, il vit au-dessus de sa tete, sur la
chaussee de la route, le chameau qui filait a grandes enjambees,
allongeant le cou d'un air anxieux.

Alors, soulage d'un grand poids, le heros sortit de sa cachette,
[30]et rentra dans la ville par un sentier detourne qui longeait le
mur de son petit clos.


VII


_Catastrophes sur catastrophes._


Page 89

En arrivant devant sa maison mauresque, Tartarin s'arreta
tres etonne. Le jour tombait, la rue etait deserte. Par la porte
basse en ogive que la negresse avait oublie de fermer, on entendait
des rires, des bruits de verres, des detonations de bouchons
[5]de Champagne, et dominant tout ce joli vacarme une voix de
femme qui chantait, joyeuse et claire:

Aimes-tu, Marco la Belle,
La danse aux salons en fleurs....

"Tron de Diou!" fit le Tarasconnais en palissant, et il se
[10]precipita dans la cour.

Malheureux Tartarin! Quel spectacle l'attendait.... Sous
les arceaux du petit cloitre, au milieu des flacons, des patisseries,
des coussins epars, des pipes, des tambourins, des guitares,
Baia debout, sans veston bleu ni corselet, rien qu'une chemisette
[15]de gaze argentee et un grand pantalon rose tendre, chantait
_Marco la Belle_ avec une casquette d'officier de marine sur
l'oreille.... A ses pieds, sur une natte, gave d'amour et de
confitures, Barbassou, l'infame capitaine Barbassou, se crevait
de rire en l'ecoutant.

[20]L'apparition de Tartarin, have, maigri, poudreux, les yeux
flamboyants, la chechia herissee, interrompit tout net cette aimable
orgie turco-marseillaise. Baia poussa un petit cri de
levrette effrayee, et se sauva dans la maison. Barbassou, lui,
ne se troubla pas, et riant de plus belle:

[25]"He! be! monsieur Tartarin, qu'est-ce que vous en dites?
Vous voyez bien qu'elle savait le francais!"

Tartarin de Tarascon s'avanca furieux.

"Capitaine!

--_Digo-li que vengue, moun bon!_" cria la Mauresque, se
[30]penchant de la galerie du premier avec un joli geste canaille.

Page 90

Le pauvre homme, atterre, se laissa choir sur un tambour. Sa
Mauresque savait meme le marseillais!

"Quand je vous disais de vous mefier des Algeriennes!" fit
sentencieusement le capitaine Barbassou. "C'est comme votre
[5]prince montenegrin."

Tartarin releva la tete.

"Vous savez ou est le prince?

--Oh! il n'est pas loin. Il habite pour cinq ans la belle prison
de Mustapha. Le drole s'est laisse prendre la main dans le
[10]sac.... Du reste, ce n'est pas la premiere fois qu'on le met
a l'ombre. Son Altesse a deja fait trois ans de maison centrale
quelque part ... et, tenez! je crois meme que c'est a Tarascon.

--A Tarascon!..." s'ecria Tartarin subitement illumine....
"C'est donc ca qu'il ne connaissait qu'un cote de la ville....

[15]--He! sans doute ... Tarascon, vu de la maison centrale....
Ah! mon pauvre monsieur Tartarin, il faut joliment ouvrir l'oeil
dans ce diable de pays, sans quoi on est expose a des choses
bien desagreables.... Ainsi votre histoire avec le muezzin....

--Quelle histoire? quel muezzin?

[20]--Te! pardi!... le muezzin d'en face qui faisait la cour
a Baia.... L'_Akbar_ a raconte l'affaire l'autre jour, et tout
Alger en rit encore.... C'est si drole ce muezzin qui, du haut
de sa tour, tout en chantant ses prieres, faisait sous votre nez
des declarations a la petite, et lui donnait des rendez-vous en
[25]invoquant le nom d'Allah....

--Mais c'est donc tous des gredins dans ce pays?..."
hurla le malheureux Tarasconnais.

Barbassou eut un geste de philosophe.

"Mon cher, vous savez, les pays neufs.... C'est egal! si
[30]vous m'en croyez, vous retournerez bien vite a Tarascon.

--Retourner ... c'est facile a dire.... Et l'argent?...
Vous ne savez donc pas comme ils m'ont plume, la-has, dans le
desert?

Page 91

--Qu'a cela ne tienne!" fit le capitaine en riant.... "Le
_Zouave_ part demain, et si vous voulez, je vous rapatrie ...
ca vous va-t-il, collegue?... Alors, tres bien. Vous n'avez plus
qu'une chose a faire. Il reste encore quelques fioles de champagne,
[5]une moitie de croustade ... asseyez-vous la, et sans
rancune!..."

Apres la minute d'hesitation que lui commandait sa dignite,
le Tarasconnais prit bravement son parti. Il s'assit, on trinqua;
Baia, redescendue au bruit des verres, chanta la fin de _Marco
[10]la Belle_, et la fete se prolongea fort avant dans la nuit.

Vers trois heures du matin, la tete legere et le pied lourd, le
bon Tartarin revenait d'accompagner son ami le capitaine, lorsqu'en
passant devant la mosquee, le souvenir du muezzin et
de ses farces le fit rire, et tout de suite une belle idee de vengeance
[15]lui traversa le cerveau. La porte etait ouverte. Il entra,
suivit de longs couloirs tapisses de nattes, monta, monta encore,
et finit par se trouver dans un petit oratoire turc, ou une lanterne
en fer decoupe se balancait au plafond, brodant les murs blancs
d'ombres bizarres.

[20]Le muezzin etait la, assis sur un divan, avec son gros turban,
sa pelisse blanche, sa pipe de Mostaganem, et devant un grand
verre d'absinthe fraiche, qu'il battait religieusement, en attendant
l'heure d'appeler les croyants a la priere.... A la vue
de Tartarin, il lacha sa pipe de terreur.

[25]"Pas un mot, cure," fit le Tarasconnais, qui avait son
idee.... "Vite, ton turban, ta pelisse!..."

Le cure turc, tout tremblant, donna son turban, sa pelisse,
tout ce qu'on voulut. Tartarin s'en affubla, et passa gravement
sur la terrasse du minaret.

[30]La mer luisait au loin. Les toits blancs etincelaient au clair de
lune. On entendait dans la brise marine quelques guitares attardees....
Le muezzin de Tarascon se recueillit un moment, puis,
levant les bras, il commenca a psalmodier d'une voix suraigue:

Page 92

"_La Allah il Allah_.... Mahomet est un vieux farceur.,..
L'Orient, le Coran, les bachagas, les lions, les Mauresques, tout
ca ne vaut pas un viedaze!... Il n'y a plus de _Teurs_....
Il n'y a que des carotteurs.... Vive Tarascon!..."

[5]Et pendant qu'en un jargon bizarre, mele d'arabe et de provencal,
l'illustre Tartarin jetait aux quatre coins de l'horizon, sur
la ville, sur la plaine, sur la montagne, sa joyeuse malediction
tarasconnaise, la voix claire et grave des autres muezzins lui
repondait, en s'eloignant de minaret en minaret, et les derniers
[10]croyants de la ville haute se frappaient devotement la poitrine.


VIII


_Tarascon! Tarascon!_


Midi. Le _Zouave_ chauffe, on va partir. La-haut, sur le balcon
du cafe Valentin, MM. les officiers braquent la longue-vue, et
viennent, colonel en tete, par rang de grade, regarder l'heureux
petit bateau qui va en France. C'est la grande distraction de
[15]l'etat-major.... En has, la rade etincelle. La culasse des
vieux canons turcs enterres le long du quai flambe au soleil.
Les passagers se pressent. Biskris et Mahonnais entassent
les bagages dans les barques.

Tartarin de Tarascon, lui, n'a pas de bagages. Le voici qui
[20]descend de la rue de la Marine, par le petit marche, plein de
bananes et de pasteques, accompagne de son ami Barbassou.
Le malheureux Tarasconnais a laisse sur la rive du Maure sa
caisse d'armes et ses illusions, et maintenant il s'apprete a
voguer vers Tarascon, les mains dans ses poches.... A peine
[25]vient-il de sauter dans la chaloupe du capitaine, qu'une bete
essoufflee degringole du haut de la place, et se precipite vers
lui, en galopant. C'est le chameau, le chameau fidele, qui, depuis
vingt-quatre heures, cherche son maitre dans Alger.

Page 93

Tartarin, en le voyant, change de couleur et feint de ne pas
le connaitre; mais le chameau s'acharne. Il fretille au long du
quai. Il appelle son ami, et le regarde avec tendresse:
"Emmene-moi," semble dire son oeil triste, "emmene-moi dans la barque,
[5]loin, bien loin de cette Arabie en carton peint, de cet Orient
ridicule, plein de locomotives et de diligences, ou--dromadaire
declasse--je ne sais plus que devenir. Tu es le dernier Turc,
je suis le dernier chameau.... Ne nous quittons plus, o mon
Tartarin....

[10]--Est-ce que ce chameau est a vous?" demande le capitaine.

"Pas du tout!" repond Tartarin, qui fremit a l'idee d'entrer
dans Tarascon avec cette escorte ridicule; et, reniant impudemment
le compagnon de ses infortunes, il repousse du pied le sol
algerien, et donne a la barque l'elan du depart.... Le chameau flaire
[15]l'eau, allonge le cou, fait craquer ses jointures et, s'elancant
derriere la barque a corps perdu, il nage de conserve vers le
_Zouave_, avec son dos bombe, qui flotte comme une gourde, et
son grand col, dresse sur l'eau en eperon de trireme.

Barque et chameau viennent ensemble se ranger aux flancs
[20]du paquebot.

"A la fin, il me fait peine, ce dromadaire!" dit le capitaine
Barbassou tout emu, "j'ai envie de le prendre a mon
bord.... En arrivant a Marseille, j'en ferai hommage an
Jardin zoologique."

[25]On hissa sur le pont, a grand renfort de palans et de
cordes, le chameau, alourdi par l'eau de mer, et le _Zouave_ se
mit en route.

Les deux jours que dura la traversee, Tartarin les passa tout
seul dans sa cabine, non pas que la mer fut mauvaise, ni que
[30]la chechia eut trop a souffrir, mais le diable de chameau, des
que son maitre apparaissait sur le pont, avait autour de lui des
empressements ridicules.... Vous n'avez jamais vu un chameau
afficher quelqu'un comme cela!...

Page 94

D'heure en heure, par les hublots de la cabine ou il mettait
le nez quelquefois, Tartarin vit le bleu du ciel algerien palir;
puis, enfin, un matin, dans une brume d'argent, il entendit avec
bonheur chanter toutes les cloches de Marseille. On etait
[5]arrive ... le _Zouave_ jeta l'ancre.

Notre homme, qui n'avait pas de bagages, descendit sans rien
dire, traversa Marseille en hate, craignant toujours d'etre suivi
par le chameau, et ne respira que lorsqu'il se vit installe dans
un wagon de troisieme classe, filant bon train sur Tarascon....
[10]Securite trompeuse! A peine a deux lieues de Marseille, voila
toutes les tetes aux portieres. On crie, on s'etonne. Tartarin,
a son tour, regarde, et ... qu'apercoit-il?... Le chameau,
monsieur, l'inevitable chameau, qui detalait sur les rails, en
pleine Crau, derriere le train, et lui tenant pied. Tartarin,
[15]consterne, se rencoigna, en fermant les yeux.

Apres cette expedition desastreuse, il avait compte rentrer
chez lui incognito. Mais la presence de ce quadrupede encombrant
rendait la chose impossible. Quelle rentree il allait
faire, bon Dieu! Pas le son, pas de lions, rien. . . Un
[20]chameau!...

"Tarascon!... Tarascon!..."
Il fallut descendre....

O stupeur! a peine la chechia du heros apparut-elle dans
l'ouverture de la portiere, un grand cri: "Vive Tartarin!" fit
[25]trembler les voutes vitrees de la gare.--"Vive Tartarin! vive
le tueur de lions!" Et des fanfares, des choeurs d'orpheons
eclaterent.... Tartarin se sentit mourir; il croyait a une
mystification. Mais non! tout Tarascon etait la, chapeaux en
l'air, et sympathique. Voila le brave commandant Bravida,
[30]l'armurier Costecalde, le president, le pharmacien, et tout le
noble corps des chasseurs de casquettes qui se presse autour de
son chef, et le porte en triomphe tout le long des escaliers....

Page 95

Singuliers effets du mirage! la peau du lion aveugle, envoyee
a Bravida, etait cause de tout ce bruit. Avec cette modeste
fourrure, exposee au cercle, les Tarasconnais, et derriere eux
tout le Midi, s'etaient monte la tete. Le Semaphore avait parle.
[5]On avait invente un drame. Ce n'etait plus un lion que Tartarin
avait tue, c'etaient dix lions, vingt lions, une marmelade de lions!
Aussi Tartarin, debarquant a Marseille, y etait deja illustre sans
le savoir, et un telegramme enthousiaste I'avait devance de deux
heures dans sa ville natale.

[10]Mais ce qui mit le comble a la joie populaire, ce fut quand
on vit un animal fantastique, couvert de poussiere et de sueur,
apparaitre derriere le heros, et descendre a cloche-pied l'escalier
de la gare. Tarascon crut un instant sa Tarasque revenue.

Tartarin rassura ses compatriotes.

[15]"C'est mon chameau," dit-il.

Et deja sous l'influence du soleil tarasconnais, ce beau soleil
qui fait mentir ingenument, il ajouta, en caressant la bosse du
dromadaire:

"C'est une noble bete!... Elle m'a vu tuer tous mes lions."

[20]La-dessus, il prit familierement le bras du commandant, rouge
de bonheur; et, suivi de son chameau, entoure des chasseurs
de casquettes, acclame par tout le peuple, il se dirigea paisiblement
vers la maison du baobab, et, tout en marchant, il commenca
le recit de ses grandes chasses:

[25]"Figurez-vous, disait-il, qu'un certain soir, en plein Sahara...."


END OF THE TEXT





NOTES

The notes refer to the page and line number in the following format:
_Page#_ Line#.



_Dedication_ _Gonzague-Privat_ (Louis de): painter, art critic and
novelist, born at Montpellier in 1843. Daudet wrote a preface for his
"Joie perdue" (1893).

_1_ 1 _Tarascon_: a very old city (population 9,000) on the east bank of
the Rhone, opposite Beaucaire (cf. note to _13_28), about fifty miles
northwest of Marseilles. To Daudet the choice of proper names was always
a matter for careful consideration. Tarascon was not the home of the
original Tartarin (see Introduction, p. xxvi), but, as Daudet explains in
"Trente Ans de Paris," p 142, "a pseudonym picked up on the road from
Paris to Marseilles because when rounded out by the southern accent it
vibrated sonorously and triumphed at the conductor's call of stations like
the war-cry of an Apache Indian." On the _Tarasque_ cf. note to _3_25.

_1_ 2 _il y a ... de cela:_ 'that was ... ago,' lit. 'there are ... from
that.'

_1_ 3 _je m'en souviens:_ 'I remember it.' _Se souvenir de quelque chose,_
hence _s'en souvenir (en_ replacing _de_ + a pronoun); cf. _changer de
chanson, en changer_ _7_ 5, _revenir de la-bas, en revenir_ _16_ 12.

_1_ 4 _habitait:_ 'was living in.' Be careful to give the imperfect its
progressive force wherever possible.

_1_ 5 _le chemin d'Avignon:_ 'the Avignon road.' Note that an English noun
used adjectively is usually replaced in French by _de_ + noun, the student
should be careful to translate _une robe de soie_ 'a silk dress' and not
'a dress of silk'; cf. _de petits soldats de plomb_ (_71_ 4) 'little lead
soldiers,' _l'eau de mer_ (_93_26) 'the sea water', _52_25, _79_23. For
_une voix de femme_ (_89_ 5) we cannot say 'a woman voice,' but must say
'the voice of a woman,' 'woman' not being a possible noun-adjective here;
still _voix de femme_ is a noun-phrase modified by _une;_ cf. _une cour de
caravanserail_ (_70_ 21) 'the court of a caravansary,' _un coin de
mechante route_ (_70_ 28) 'the corner of a wretched road'--_Avignon:_ city
on the Rhone, above Tarascon; famous as the residence of the Popes from
1309 to 1377.

_1_ 6: _devant_: adverb, 'in front'; cf. _derriere_ in this sentence,
_dessus_ _24_ 1, _46_ 12, _depuis_ _56_ 32, _autour_ _79_ 15.

_1_ 8: Savoyards: boys and men from Savoy, southeastern France, are seen
throughout the country exercising such trades as those of bootblacks,
chimney-sweeps, charcoal-venders; cf. note to _74_ 27.--Savoyards
... tete ... leurs boites: cf. note to _29_ 11.

_1_ 10: _Du dehors ... rien_: 'seen from the outside the house seemed
nothing at all,' 'was in no way remarkable'.

_1_ 12: _coquin de sort_: a characteristic Southern oath, lit. 'rascal of
(a) fate' translate 'heavens and earth!' cf. _monstre de sort_ _63_ 27,
_coquin de bon sort_ _68_ 21. For the construction cf. _coquin de lievre_
_4_ 24, _diable d'homme_ _9_ 3. The genitive (_de_ + noun) in these
expressions replaces a noun in apposition/ Cf. Engl. "rascal of a man,"
Latin _scelus viri_; "the city New York," "the city of New York."

[Footnote _1_ 16: _du pays_. i.e. 'native' to that part of Europe; cf. _au
pays_ _64_ 27, _du cru_ _26_ 6.]

_1_ 17: _rien que_: 'nothing but'; i.e. _il n'y avait rien que_. Cf. _37_
10, and notes to _13_ 1,_4_ 23.--plantes exotiques: a few lines farther
on, our author explains that these exotic plants were, of course, not of
full natural size. The baobab in its native African home is only 40-70
feet in height, but its trunk is sometimes 30 feet in diameter. In _17_
20-21 we are given to understand that Tartarin's baobab, the most admired
of his botanical rarities, is perhaps after all nothing but a turnip, and
we are led to suspect that some of the others are not what they pretend to
be. If we are gifted with even a small portion of the imagination
possessed by Tartarin and his fellow-townsmen, we can understand how a
turnip may after a while come really to be a baobab; if we have not
sufficient imagination to admit this possibility, we shall not be able to
appreciate the story of the life and adventures of Tartarin de Tarascon.


_2_ 2: _a se croire ... Afrique_: '(enough) to (make one) believe himself
in the very heart of (cf. _5_ 7) Africa.' a = _assez pour_; cf. _c'est a
mourir de rire_, 'it's enough to make you die with laughter'; also _6_ 14,
_21_ 16.

_2_ 3: _bien entendu_: 'of course'; lit. 'well (heard) understood.'

_2_ 5: arbos gigantea: Latin, = _arbre geant_ 'giant tree.'--tenait a
l'aise dans: 'easily found room in.'

_2_ 6: pot de reseda: 'mignonette pot.' _Pot de fleurs_ = 'flower pot'
Logically we should expect, and in a dealer's catalogue we find, _pot a
fleurs_, cf. _une tasse a cafe_ 'a coffee cup,' _une tasse de cafe_ 'a cup
of coffee.' Daudet in speaking of this same mignonette pot uses _pot a
reseda_ in "Tartarin sur les Alpes," p. 358.--c'est egal: 'all the same'.

_2_ 7: _deja_: lit. 'already'; 'anyhow,' 'nevertheless'.

_2_ 8: _s'en retournaient_: cf. _s'en aller_ _17_ 4, _s'en revenir_ _53_
11.

_2_ 10: _je dus eprouver_: 'I must have experienced.' _Devoir_ is
difficult to translate because the corresponding English auxiliaries
(_must_, _ought_) are defective. The following are the most usual
translations:
_je dois aller_ I must go, I ought to go, I should go, I have to go, I am
to go.
_je devais aller_ I had to go, I was to go (cf. _18_ 2) I should have
gone, I must have gone (cf. _16_ 26).
_je dus aller_ I had to go (cf. _67_ 7), I must have gone (cf. _40_ 4).
_je devrai aller_ I shall have to go
_je devrais aller_ I should go, I ought to go, I should have to go.
_j'ai du aller_ I had to go, I have had to go, I must have gone
Cf. notes to _43_ 20, 29.

_2_ 11: _mirifique_: a mock-heroic synonym for _merveilleux_.--_bien
autre_: _bien_ in its common intensive use, 'quite.' _Bien_ frequently
adds to a passage a shade of meaning which can be rendered in English only
by a complete remodeling of the sentence, e.g. _je veux bien_ 'I have no
objection,' 'I consent.' When _autre_ is preceded by _bien_ or _tout_, it
usually carries the idea of superiority.

_2_ 14: _ouvrant de plain-pied sur le baobab_: 'opening on a level with
the baobab'; there was no step. _Plain_='flat.'

[Footnote _2_ 18: _carabines_: 'rifles.' _carabine_ is the French word for
"rifle", _fusil_ is the general term (gun) and is applied particularly to
the shotgun The English word "rifle" is sometimes used in French for a
rifle having a long barrel. With _carabine_ cf. English "carbine," a
short-barreled rifle. Translate here 'carbines, rifles.']

_2_ 19: _catalans_: Catalonia is in northeastern Spain.
--_couteaux-revolvers_: 'pistol dirks,' pistols with dirks set in their
butts, ordaggers with pistols in their hilts.--_couteaux-poignards_:
'dagger-knives' an ancient form of one-edged dagger, having a long and
heavy blade.--_krish_ (criss, kriss) malais: 'Malay creeses,' daggers with
sinuous edges, famous for deadliness.

_2_ 20: _fleches caraibes_: 'Carib arrows.' The Caribs are the most
war-like tribe of northern South America, the home of the famous curare
poison and other arrow-poisons.--_casse-tete_: any kind of war-club that
can be wielded by one hand; transl. 'war-clubs' (cf. _59_ 29);
indeclinable.

_2_ 21: _est-ce que je sais!_ lit. 'do I know!' transl. 'and what not.'

_2_ 23: _glaives_: 'swords.' _Glaive_ (cf. Engl. "glaive"), from Latin
_gladius_, is a poetic word for _epee_.


_2_ 24 _vous donner la chair de poule:_ 'make your flesh creep' With the
French _chair de poule_ 'hen flesh' cf. Engl. "goose flesh".

_2_36 _yataganerie._ the _yatagan,_ 'yataghan,' is the saber of the Turks
and the Arabs, from this word Daudet coined _yataganerie_ on the analogy
of _epicerie, papeterie,_ etc, transl. 'paraphernalia of war'.

_2_28 _bonhomme_ a noun used adjectively, transl. 'kindly'.

_2_ 29 _n'y touchez pas_ _Toucher a quelque chose,_ hence _y toucher,_ 'to
touch it,' _y_,' replacing _a_ + a pronoun, cf. _a Shang Hai_ and _y_ _16_
10, and notes to _6_ 14, _7_ 6, _9_ 7, _24_ 7.

_3_3 _Cook:_ Captain James Cook (1728-1779), famous English scientific
explorer, killed by savages in Hawaii.--_Cooper_ James Fenimore Cooper
(1789-1851), the famous American writer of Indian and sea stories
Leatherstocking (_Bas de cuir_) is as well known in France as in
America--_Gustave Aimard_ (1818 1883) spent several years in America
and wrote many tales in the style of Cooper.

_3_ 4 _chasse a l'ours_ 'bear hunting,' but _chasse au faucon_ 'hunting
with the falcon,' 'hawking.'

_3_ 10 _tout en lisant_ 'while reading' _En_ with the present participle
is reinforced by _tout_.

_3_12 _brave:_ cf. _un brave homme_ 'a good, kindly man,' _un homme brave_
'a brave man'.

_3_ 13 _bonasse:_ _bon_ + the pejorative suffix _-asse,_ 'guileless'.

_3_ 19 _midi_  midday,' 'noon,' 'South', Latin _media dies._

_3_ 22 _Vous saurez:_ 'you must know'.

_3_ 25 _Tarasque:_ a monster which, according to the legend, devastated
the country about Tarascon until it was slain by Saint Martha, sister of
Lazarus, who, in company with the three Marys, had come to Provence after
the death of Christ At irregular intervals there is a festival in Tarascon
to celebrate the destruction of the Tarasque. Martha is the patron saint
of Tarascon See "Port-Tarascon," I, iv  (pp 73 ff)--_faisait les cent
coups._ 'was playing the hundred tricks,' 'raged.'

_3_ 27 _Il y a beau jour_ '(that was) a long time ago'.

_4_ 1 _tous les dimanches matin:_ 'every Sunday morning ', cf. _tous les
jours_ 'every day' and _le matin_ 'in the morning'_--prend les armes:_
'takes arms' (not "takes its arms "), 'arms itself '.

_4_ 3 _tremblement:_ 'whole lot,' 'noisy throng,' colloquial.

_4_6 _Si ... que_ + subjunctive = 'however ', cf. _67_ 12-13, _78_ 18-19
--_bete:_ a pun on the word _bete,_ which means as a noun 'animal,' as an
adjective 'foolish'--_vous pensez bien:_ 'you can readily imagine', cf.
_7_ 10, _9_ 7, _12_ 3, _23_ 7, _56_ 17.

_4_ 8 _A cinq lieues_: 'within a radius of five leagues', cf. _48_ 26.

_4_ 9-10 _le moindre_: 'the least'--_le plus petit_: 'the smallest'.

_4_ 14 _Rhone_ 'Rhone,' the great river of southeastern France, in the
heart of Provence--_diablement_: 'deucedly' _Diable_ and _Dieu_ are used
very freely in French.

_4_ 16 _du poil et de la plume_ 'of fur and feathers'--_est tres mal note_
'has a black mark against its name', _noter_= 'to note,' 'to mark,' 'to
make a note of'.

_4_ 19 _Camargue_ a vast marshy delta at the mouth of the Rhone See
Daudet's "En Camargue," in "Lettres de mon moulin".

_4_ 23 _il ne reste plus ... que_: 'there remains nothing now, but'
_Il_ is impersonal, cf. _5_ 23, _8_ 1, _58_ 28 _Ne  plus_ = 'no longer,'
_ne que_ = 'only,' the same _ne_ serving for both _plus_ and _que_, cf.
line 30, _23_ 3, 27-28, _ne ... guere que_ _5_ 26, _1_ 17.

_4_ 24 _coquin de lievre_: cf. note to _1_ 12--_echappe ... aux_: note the
use of _a_ with _echapper_, cf. _88_ 22, and _s'arracher a_ _10_ 14
--_septembrisades_  on September 25, 1792, mobs broke into the Paris
prisons and massacred many political prisoners, hence _septembrisade_
'massacre'.

_4_ 27 _le Rapide_: _le (train) rapide_ 'the express train'.

_4_ 30 _A l'heure qu'il est meme_: 'even at the present time'.

_4_ 31 _enrages_ 'stubborn enthusiasts'.

_4_ 32 _deuil_: _faire son deuil d'une chose_ = 'to go into mourning about
a thing,' 'to give it up for lost'.

_5_ 1 _de sa nature_: 'by nature'--_qu'il mange_: _que_ for _bien que_ to
avoid repetition of _6_ 1, _24_ 16, _69_ 9--_hirondelles en salmis_
'stewed swallows' From time immemorial the swallow has been recogmzed as
the friend of man; the superstition that to kill one brings bad luck is
very old and almost umversal. Despite this belief and despite the game
laws, in southern France generally, especially in the Camargue, large
numbers of swallows are killed and eaten. Swallows and other small birds
are usually roasted, cut in small pieces, and stewed with wine (_salmis_).

_5_ 3 _me direz-vous_ 'you [reader] will say to me [author]'.

_5_ 7 _en pleine campagne_: 'into the open country', cf. _2_ 2, _41_ 13.

_5_ 11 _boeuf en daube_ 'stewed beef', properly, stewed with vegetables
and then baked slowly _Dauber_ = _braiser_--_saucissot_: italicized
because a dialectal form, = _saucisson_ 'sausage'.

_5_ 17 _du 5 etc_ 'number 5' etc, sizes of shot.

_5_ 19 _met dans_ 'hits'.

_5_ 20 _en triomphateur_: 'like a conqueror,' 'in triumph'; cf. _en bon
Meridional_ _8_ 13.

_5_ 23 _il se fait:_ 'there is carried on.' Impersonal _il_; cf. note to
_4_ 23. Note the reflexive used for the passive; cf. _cela se fait_ =
'that is done,' lit. 'that does itself,' _ce qui se consomme_ _6_ 13 =
'what is consumed,' _la forte s'ouvre_ _18_ 6 = 'the door opens itself,'
'is opened,' 'opens,' _cela se sait_ _6_ 18 = 'that is known,' _cela se
peut_ = 'that is possible'; cf. also _s'animer_ 'to animate oneself,' 'to
become (be) animated,' _se decourager_ 'to become (be) discouraged.'

_5_ 26 _ne guere que:_ 'scarcely any one besides '; cf. note to _4_ 23.

_5_27 _leur en achete:_ _acheter des casquettes aux chapeliers;_ hence
_leur en achete, leur_ replacing _a eux._

_5_ 29 _il partait:_ 'he used to set out.'

_5_ 32 _Aussi:_ _aussi_ at the beginning of a sentence or phrase is
usually to be rendered 'and so,' 'therefore.' With this _aussi_ (as with
some other adverbs) the word-order is verb--pronoun; hence
_reconnaissent-ils._ Cf. _24_ 12, _41_ 20; _a peine_ _7_ 33, _40_ 14; _en
vain_ _10_ 10; _toujours_ _25_ 9. Note the order with aussi comme...!
_18_ 17.

_6_ 1 _qu'il:_ _que_ replaces _comme;_ cf. note to _5_ 1.

_6_ 3 _birman:_ 'Burman.' Burma is in southeastern Asia.--_ces_: cf. note
to _16_ 13.

_6_ 6 _de trois a quatre:_ 'from three to four (o'clock).'

_6 10_ _qui rendait:_ 'dispensing,' see note to _55_ 7.--_Nemrod double de
Salomon:_ 'a Nimrod and a Solomon at the same time.' _Doubler_--'to
line'; _un manteau double de fourrure_ 'a fur-lined coat.' For Nimrod,
"a mighty hunter before the Lord," see Genesis x, 8-9; for Solomon as
unerring judge, I Kings iii, 28.

_6_ _chapter heading_  _Nan!_ dialectal form of _non!_ See _8_ 13-14.

_6_ 13 _Ce qui ... de romances:_ lit. 'what ... of ballads'; transl. 'the
number of ballads that ...' Note that _romance_ = 'ballad,' _roman_ =
'novel,' 'romance.' See Engl. dict. for etymology.

_6_ 14 _c'est a n'y pas croire:_ 'it passes belief,' lit. 'it is enough to
not believe it'; cf. note to _2_ 2. _Croire a, y croire,_ cf. note to _2_
29.

_6_ 18 _cela se sait:_ cf. note to _5_ 23.

_6_ 23 _receveur de l'enregistrement:_ 'recorder' (of deeds and various
transactions).

_6_ 24 _si j'etais-t-invisible:_ the non-etymological _t_ is inserted to
avoid hiatus, the _s_ of _etais_ being unpronounced: cf. _Malbrough s'en
va-t-en guerre._ This error is common in the speech of the uneducated
classes.--_n'me_: the _e_ of _ne_ is omitted as in conversational French.

_7_ 3 _on se reunit:_ see next note.--_on se les chante:_ 'they sing them
(the ballads) to one another.' Note _se_ = '(to) one another.' _Nous,
vous,_ _se_, are used as reflexive or reciprocal objects, direct or
indirect ('ourselves' or 'each other,' 'to ourselves' or 'to each other'
etc.), cf. _9_ 21, _16_ 29, _93_ 8. _Se_ is used as a reciprocal pronoun
several times in this paragraph.

_7_ 4 _depuis_ ... _chantent_ 'in all the time that they have been singing
them to one another.' _Chantent_ is present tense with _depuis_.

_7_ 5 _en changer_: cf. note to _1_ 3.

_7_ 6 _n'y touche_: cf. note to _2_ 29.

_7_ 18 _les lui faire chanter_: 'to make him sing them'; _faire chanter a
Tartarin, lui faire chanter_, = 'to make T. sing,' 'to make him sing.'
--_Revenu ... salon_: 'early (in life) surfeited with salon successes'
_Revenu_ = 'returned,' 'satiated,' 'tired of.'

_7_ 21 _cercle_: 'club.' The English word "club" is used in French in
reference to sporting and political clubs.

_7_ 22 _Nimes_: Daudet's birthplace, an ancient city with remarkable
Roman remains, eighteen miles west of Tarascon.

_7_ 25 _apres s'etre bien fait prier_: 'after having been begged a long
time'; cf. _je me fais prier, je me suis fait prier_. An active infinitive
after _faire_ is to be translated passively: _faire batir une maison_ =
'to cause (some one) to build a house,' 'to have a house built'; cf. _31_
9, _64_ 27, _77_ 25, _81_ 7. _Se faire prier_ = 'to have oneself begged,'
_se faire comprendre (_40_ 26) = 'to make himself understood.' _Se faire
expliquer_ (_24_ 6-7) = 'to have explained to themselves,' _faire
expliquer une lecon_ = 'to have a lesson explained.' The same
constructions are used with _laisser_; cf. _29_ 25, _49_ 14-15, _60_ 13.

_7_ 26 _dire_: 'to say,' 'relate impressively,' 'sing', cf. _24_ 21
--_Robert_ le _Diable_: 'Robert the Devil,' a famous opera by Meyerbeer,
text by Scribe (1832). The story, widespread throughout Europe during the
Middle Ages and later, is concerned with the struggle of a pious mother to
rescue her son from the devil. She is successful Robert saves Rome from
the Saracens and ends his life as a hermit.

_7_ 28 _Pour moi_: 'as for me,' 'as far as I am concerned'--_quand je
vivrais cent ans_: 'even if I should live for a hundred years', note this
meaning of _quand_ with the conditional.

_7_ 29 _s'approchant du_: note _de_ used with _s'approcher, se
rapprocher_, _20_ 25.

_7_ 33 _A peine avait-il_: cf. note to _5_ 32.

_8_ 1 _il allait se passer_: 'there was going to happen'; cf. note to _4_
23.--_quelque chose de grand_: 'something great'; note the _de_ Cf.
_quelque chose d'informe_ _35_ 21, _quelque chose de noir_ _45_ 18.

_8_ 6 _bis_: Latin, 'twice,' indicating that a thing is to be repeated.

_8_ 9 _A vous, Tartarin:_ 'your turn, Tartarin!'

_8_ 13 _en bon Meridional:_ 'like a true Southerner'; cf. note to _5_ 20.

_8_ 18 _de plus belle:_ 'louder than ever'; supply a feminine noun
_(maniere, facon_) after _belle;_ of _45_ 15.

_8_ 19 _la chose en restait la:_ 'the thing stopped there'; the so called
redundant _en;_ of _16_ 19-20, _17_ 16, _18_ 32, _28_ 26, _90 30 Cf. the
redundant _y_ (note to _9 7) _En_ and _y_ in these cases cannot easily be
translated, but the student should train himself to recognize their force.

_8_ 25 _clignait de l'oeil:_ cf. _battre des mains_ 'to clap one's hands.'

_8_ 26 _dire d'un ... air:_ 'to say with an ... air'--_Je viens de:_
_venir de faire quelque chose_ = 'to have just done somethmg.' In this
passage the expression has both the figurative and the literal meaning: 'I
come (have come) from the Bezuquets', where I have just sung.'

_9_ 3 _diable d'homme:_ cf. note to _1_ 12.

_9_ 4 _prendre:_ 'to captivate.'

_9_ 7 _lapin:_ lit. 'rabbit'; familiarly, as here, 'a game one.'--_s'y
connaissait en lapins:_ _se connaitre a_ or _en_ = 'to be an expert in.'
_Y_ in this passage is redundant: it replaces _a_ + _eux_ (cf. note to
_2_29), which is repeated in _en lapins_, cf. _10_ 30, and the redundant
_en_ (note to _8_ 19).

_9_ 14 _cheval de trompette:_ 'trumpeter's horse,' 'war-horse.'
_Trompette_ = 'trumpet,' 'trumpeter.'

_9_ 16 _gros sous:_ 'ten-centime pieces,' 'two-cent pieces.'
A five-centime piece (one cent) is called _un petit sou._

_9_ 17 _lord Seymour:_ Henry Seymour (1805-1859), an eccentric,
extravagant English lord who spent most of his life in Paris. He was well
known to the Parisian populace.

_9_ 18 _Roi des halles tarasconnaises:_ 'King of the Tarascon
Market-Place.' Francois de Vendome, duc de Beaufort (1616-1669), fearless,
presumptuous, coarse, was the idol of the rabble, by whom he was surnamed
_Roi des Halles_ (the great market of Paris).

_9_ 20 _bien sangle ... futaine:_ 'in his tight-fitting fustian
shooting-jacket. _Sangler_= 'to bind with a girth,' 'to strap'; cf. _un
officier sangle_ 'an officer with a tight-fitting coat on.'

_9_ 21 _se montrant ... ils se disaient:_ cf. note to _7_ 2.

_10_ 4 _pampas:_ 'pampas,' vast plains in Argentina, extending from the
Atlantic to the Andes.

_10_ 5 _faire ... casquette:_ _faire une battue_ = to beat (_battre_) the
woods or bushes for game. Transl. 'to go a-cap-hunting.'

_10_ 7 _A la longue, il y aurait eu_ (conditional anterior of _il y a_)
_de quoi:_ 'in the end there would have been wherewith,' 'if this
existence were continued long, it would have been enough.'

_10_ 10 _en vain s'entourait-il:_ cf. note to _5_ 32.

_10_ 13 _lectures romanesques:_ 'romantic readings.' The French for Engl.
'lecture' is _conference, causerie. Romanesque_ = 'romantic.' The French
_romantique_ is used in speaking of the Romantic School literary history,
and of landscapes.--_don Quichotte:_ hero of the celebrated novel "Don
Quixote," by Cervantes (1547-1616, cf. note to _39_ 24). Don Quixote, a
Spanish gentleman, has his head turned as a result of excessive reading of
romances, and, attended by his fat, vulgar squire, Sancho Panza, scours
Spain, righting wrongs and rescuing fair damsels, in the fashion of the
knights of old. Don Quixote was ever tireless and fearless, while Sancho
Panza disliked hard knocks and preferred a slothful life of ease and
plenty to the glorious career of privations which was the lot of the
knight errant. Tartarin de Tarascon combined the qualities of Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza; hence a terrible internal conflict of which we shall
read in chapter vi. This disconcerting complexity of character, which is
not confined to a Southerner if we may believe the epigraph of this work
(_En France tout le monde est un peu de Tarascon_), is again elucidated in
"La Defense de Tarascon" (in "Contes du lundi") and in "Tartarin sur les
Alpes," ch. ii, p 35, where the adventurous spirit of warren rabbits
(_lapins de garenne_) clashes with the domesticity of cabbage-garden
rabbits (_lapins de choux_).

_10_ 14 _s'arracher aux:_ cf. note to _4_ 24.

_10_ 22 _par les lourdes apres-midi d'ete:_ 'during the sultry summer
afternoons.' Note the use of _par_ in statements relating to the weather;
cf. _32_ 1, _63_ 17.--_a lire:_ 'engaged in reading'; cf. _a mener_ _68_
32, and _73_ 30.

_10_ 24 _que de fois:_ 'how many times.'

_10_ 27 _foulard de tete:_ 'kerchief round his head.'

_10_ 30 _Qu'ils y viennent maintenant!_ 'now just let'em come!' _Y_ is
redundant; cf. note to _9_ 7.

_11_ 6 _Touareg:_ cf. note to _40_ 17.--_des Abruzzes:_ 'of the Abruzzi,'
a mountainous district of central Italy, noted for its brigands.

_11_ 9 _avait beau les appeler:_ 'called them in vain'; cf. _28_ 16, _46_
8. _Beau_ is ironical in this expression; cf. Engl. "a fine fellow," "a
pretty mess."

_11_ 10 _Pecaire_ (Latin _peccator = pecheur_ 'sinner'): sometimes
Gallicized by Daudet under the form _pechere_. A very common Provencal
exclamation, usually denoting pity or resignation. Transl. 'alas,' 'dear
me.'

_11_ 12 _les attendait toujours:_ 'continued to wait for them'; note this
force of _toujours_; cf. _26_ 11, _71_ 20.

_11_ 14 _chevalier du Temple:_ 'Knight Templar.' The order of the knights
of the Temple (i.e. the temple of Solomon) was organized in 1118 for the
purpose of protecting pilgrims on the way to the Holy Land.

_11_ 15 _tigre chinois_ the Chinese soldiers used to be called _tigres de
guerre_ (Littre, Suppl).

_11_ 17 _de pied en cap_ (Lat _caput_) 'from head to foot', of Engl.
'armed cap a pic' _Cap_ = 'head' is obsolete except in this expression
and in a few technical terms.

_11_ 20 _Branle-bas de combat!_ 'clear decks for action!' _Le branle_ is
the word formerly used for the seaman's hammock (now usually _le hamac_),
_branle bas_ = 'down with the hammocks,' get them out of the way.

_11_ 24 _entre drap et flanelle:_ transl. 'under his coat'--_Par exemple_
lit 'for example', a common exclamation of which the translation varies
with the context, here, 'I assure you!'

_11_ 27 _se fendait, tirait:_ 'lunged,' 'thrust,' fencing expressions.

_11_ 29 _a l'anglaise_ (supply _mode_ 'manner'): 'in the English manner,'
i.e. calmly, cf. _a la mode indienne_ _12_ 33.

_12_ 3 _vous pensez:_ cf. note to _4_ 6.

_12_ 6 _fermait la porte a double tour:_ 'double locked the gate', lit.
'with a double turn of the key' In the old lock a single turn of the key
drove the bolt into the socket, a second turn drove it farther.

_12_ 15 _chaussee:_ 'highway,' the middle of a road or street, usually
paved and arched, cf. _88_ 27.

_12_ 21 _cours:_ 'public promenade' "There is all round Tarascon a
promenade (_cours_) lined with trees, which is called in the local
dictionary _le Tour de ville_ Every Sunday afternoon the Tarasconians,
slaves to habit despite their imagination, make their circuit of the town
(_font leur tour de ville_)" "Tartarin sur les Alpes," ch. 11, p 42, cf.
_23_ 10-11.

_12_ 22 _par le plus long:_ supply _chemin_.

_12_ 25 _coupe-gorge_ (plural and singular alike) 'haunts of cutthroats'
_Coupe jarret_ = 'cut throat' (_jarret_ = 'ham string')--_lui tomber sur
le dos_ 'fall upon his back', cf._18_ 33, _20_ 13, _28_ 8, _31_ 6, _65_ 11.

_12_ 27 _jamais, au grand jamais:_ 'never, NEVER'.

_12_ 28 _eut la chance:_ 'had the good luck' Engl. 'chance' = French
Occasion.

_12_ 31 _plante sur place:_ 'rooted to the spot', of _en resta plante_
_44_ 11.

_12_ 32 _prenant le vent:_ 'sniffing the air,' used of hunting dogs, as a
nautical expression = 'sailing near the wind'.

_13_ 1 _Plus de doutes:_ 'no more doubt', cf.1 17 With _plus, pas, jamais,
rien_, and other words of this type _ne_ is omitted when the verb is
omitted, but cf._71_ 8, _88_ 3.

_13_ 3 se ramassait sur lui-meme._ 'gathered himself,' 'crouched'_.

_13_ 7 _Te! ve!_ dialectal for tiens, vois, used as exclamations, 'Well,
well!'--_adieu:_ in Southern France occasionally (as here and _64_4) a
greeting ('hello'), though ordinarily, as in Northern France,  a parting
salutation ('good-by'). The Southerner prefixes an exclamation which
Daudet writes sometimes _et_ as here and sometimes _he_, ('hey') as in
_64_ 4.

_13_ 9 _la sienne_ 'his' (ballad), see _6_ 17.

_13_ 13 _de long en large:_ 'up and down'.

_13_ 18_: faire son bezigue:_ 'to play his game of bezique,' a game of
Cards.

_13_ 21_ diable au vert:_ 'far away corners of the globe' The castle of
Vauvert in the suburbs of Paris belonged to King Louis IX.  Some
Carthusian monks who desired to gain possession of it pretended that it
was haunted by evil spirits, and it was abandoned to them, hence the
expression _diable Vauvert_ (_Vauvert_ is a genitive, 'the demon of
Vauvert'), which was later corrupted to _diable au vert _. The castle was
far from the center of the city, perhaps it is for this reason that _aller
au diable vauvert, au diable au vert_, means 'to go a long distance'. I
have not seen an article on this locution which appeared in the _Revue du
Midi_, 1911.--_comment diantre:_ 'how the deuce', diantre is a euphemism
for diable.

_13_22  _se trouvait-il_ 'did it happen'  _Se trouver_ = 'to find
oneself, itself,'  'to happen,' 'to be'.

_13_26_ Marseille:_  'Marseilles,' the greatest seaport in France and the
metropolis of the south, only sixty miles from Tarascon.

_13_27 _Provencal_ a native of Provence   Provence = Latin _provincia,_
'_the_ province,' comprising that part of Gaul which was first conquered
and organized, later _Gallia Narbonensis_ Properly, Provence is today the
southeastern part of France, but the  terms _Provence, Provencal,_ are
frequently used to designate all of southern France (south of the Loire),
the _Midi_--_se paie:_ 'treats himself to', cf. _je me paie un bon diner_
'I treat myself to a good dinner'--_C'est au plus s'il_ 'at the most
he,'  'scarcely did he'.

_13_28 _Beaucaire:_ a city on the Rhone, opposite Tarascon, to which it is
joined by a long suspension bridge, cf. note to _18_ 11.

_13_ 30 _diable de pont:_ cf. note to _1_ 12.

_14_4 _C'est que:_ 'the fact is that'.

_14_ 5 _Je sens deux hommes en moi_: see Romans vii, Galatians v, 17.  One
of the distinctive features of the religion of St Paul was its insistence
upon an internal conflict between the higher and lower impulses of man.
Daudet is probably thinking of the expression of this doctrine in one of
Racine's canticles (III) where the words _Je trouve deux hommes en moi_
appear.

_14_ 6 _Pere d'Eglise_ 'Church Father' Paul was an Apostle, not a Church
Father. The Church Fathers were the early disseminators and expounders of
the Christian faith who continued the work of the apostles--_Il l'eut dit
vrai_ = _il l'aurait dit vrai. Vrai_ is used adverbially, 'truly'.

_14_ 10 _hidalgo_ Spanish, 'nobleman', Latin _filius de aliquo_ 'son of
somebody '--_pretexte de corps_ 'apology for a body'.

_14_ 11 _manquait de prise_ 'had no hold'.

_14_ 14 _brave homme de corps_ 'jolly old body'.

_14_ 16 _le corps ... pattes_ Tartarin's Quixotic mind dwelt in the 'fat
bellied,' 'short legged' body of a Sancho Panza.

_14_ 19 _mauvais menage_ faire _faire mauvais menage_ is said of a husband
and wife who do not get along well together.

_14_ 21 _Lucien_ 'Lucian,' the famous Greek satirist of the second century
A.D., author of brilliant "Dialogues of the Gods" and "Dialogues of the
Dead"--_Saint-Evremond_ (1613-1703) man of the world, Epicurean, skeptic,
an unsparing satirist.

_14_ 21 _rifles a deux coups_ = _fusils rayes a doubles canons_ _50_ 7,
'double barreled rifles'.

_15_ 2 _genouilleres_ 'knee caps,' flannel or knitted coverings for the
knees, to prevent or ease rheumatism.

_15_ 3 _casquettes a oreillettes_ 'caps with ear laps'.

_15_ 6 _sonnant la bonne_ 'ringing for the maid' Note this use of _sonner_

_15_ 9 _moire_ 'shimmering,' like watered silks cf. Engl. 'mohair,'
'moire'.

_15_ _chapter heading_ _Shang-Hai_ 'Shanghai,' a seaport in China--_haut
commerce_14_ 5, cf. _haute finance_ 'high finance' transl. Simply.
'commerce'--_Tartares (Tatares_) 'Tartars' ('Tatars'), a generic term for
certain Mongolian tribes The Manchu Tatars were till recently rulers of
China--_serait-il....?_ 'is it possible that he be....?' Note the use of
the conditional to express conjecture or possibility, the future is used
in similar constructions _il aura manque le train_ 'he has probably missed
the train'_ cf. auriez vous l'intention_ (_76_ 8) 'is it possible that you
intend?'

_15_ 13 _avait failli partir_ 'had failed to depart', i.e. 'almost
departed'

_15_ 21 _vous apparaissait d'une hauteur!_ 'was a wonderful thing indeed!'
_Vous_ is the common ethical dative, to be omitted in translation, cf. the
Shakespearean "Knock _me_ that door!" and "There's perfection _for you_!'
"--_D'une hauteur!_ suppression for emphasis far more frequent in French
than in English, cf._30_ 17, _49_ 25 Note the play on the words _haut,
Hauteur_ _14_ 5 _n'entendait_ ... oreille-la i.e. "didn't see it in that
light".

_16_ 7 _Parions que si, parions que non_ 'I'll bet (lit 'let us bet') he
will, I'll bet he won't' _Si_ is used for _oui_ in contradictions _Que_ is
not to be translated, cf._je crois que oui (non)_ 'I think so (not)'.

_16_ 10 _Avoir failli aller_ cf.15 13.

_16_ 11 _c'etait tout comme_ colloquial, 'it was just the same'.

_16_ 12 _en revenait_ = _revenait de la bas_, 'was returning from there'.

_16_ 13 _tous ces messieurs_ 'everybody' English has no construction
corresponding to this use of _ce_ It is used deferentially, especially by
servants _Madame prie ces messieurs de l'attendre_ 'Mrs X will see you in
a moment, cf._6_ 3, _53_ 7.

_16_ 19 en arrivait a dire redundant _en_ (cf. note to _8_ 19), 'came to
the point of saying'.

_16_ 26 il devait bien savoir 'he must have known perfectly well'.

_16_ 29 s'entendre 'come to an understanding', lit 'hear each other',
'understand each other' cf. notes to _2_ 3, _7_ 2.

_16_ 32 _Toulouse_ an important city in southwestern France.

_17_ 1 _son mensonge a lui_ _a lui_ repeats the idea expressed by _son_,
thus emphasizing it, cf._20_ 13.

_17_ 4 allez-vous-en dans le Midi 'go (away) into the South' The force
of _s'en_ in _s'en aller_ is sometimes vague, and in colloquial speech
_s'en aller_ often is almost equivalent to the simple aller, e g _je m'en
vais vous dire_ 'I am going to tell you', cf._55_ 10, _63_ 22, _2_ 8, _53_
11.

_17_ 8 _butte Montmartre_ a hill (_butte_) in Paris.

_17_ 9 _Maison carree_ ('Square House') de Nimes one of the most beautiful
Roman remains in France It was a Roman temple and is very small a mere
nothing in comparison with Notre Dame--_bijou d'etagere_ 'cabinet gem' The
_etagere_ is used for displaying small articles of value, see "etagere"
and "whatnot" in Engl. Dict.

_17_ 10 _Notre-Dame_ the celebrated cathedral in Paris.

_17_ 14 _Tout au plus une sous-prefecture_ 'at the very most a
subprefecture' Arles (cf._29_ 11) with a population of 29,000, is an
example of a subprefecture Both Athens and Sparta were decidedly larger
than this, cf. note to _80_ 13 The French _departements_ (compare our
'States') are divided into arrondissements (compare our 'counties') A
prefect (_prefet_) presides over a _departement_, and a subprefect (_sous
prefet_) over an _arrondissement_ _Sous prefecture_ is synonymous with
arrondissement, or, as here, is used for the city in which the subprefect
has his offices. An _arrondissement_ is divided into _cantons_ and a
_canton_ into _communes_.

_17_ 16 en cf. note to _8_ 19.


_17_ _chapter heading_ _Atlas:_ a mountain range in northwestern Africa.

_17_ 25 _seculaire:_ 'lasting for centuries'(Lat _saeculum_), 'everlasting'
not 'secular' See Engl. dict.

_18_ 2 _devait:_ 'was to', cf._26_ 9, _32_ 10, _39_ 26 See note to _2_ 10.

_18_ 4 _etait en train de demontrer:_ 'was in the act of demonstrating';
Transl. simply 'was demonstrating'--_amateur_ 'admirer,' 'lover' The
distinction 'amateur,' 'professional,' is French as well as English, but
in French the word _amateur_ also means 'lover'--not, however, the lover
of a person Tartarin was demonstrating to some 'lovers (of arms)'.

_18_ 5 _fusil a aiguille:_ 'needle gun,' invented in 1836, and used in the
Prussian army in 1841 The cartridge in this gun is exploded by a slender
needle, or pin, which is driven into it.

_18_ 11 _foire de Beaucaire:_ cf._13_ 28 The Beaucaire fair (July 1-28),
instituted in the Middle Ages, is still famous but has in recent years
lost much of its importance.

_18_ 13 _place du chateau:_ the square in front of the castle.

_18_ 14 _un tas de:_ 'a large number of', lit 'a pile of'.

_18_ 16 _de memoire d'homme:_ 'within the memory of man', Latin _hominum
Memoria._

_18_ 17 _s'etait vue:_ 'had been seen', cf. note to _5_ 23--_comme:_
connect with _fierement_ in translation.

_18_ 24 _entre ses mains:_ 'in his hands'.

_18_ 25 _a deux pas:_ 'only a step or two away', cf._a dix mille lieues de
Tarascon_ (_2_ 2) 'ten thousand leagues away from Tarascon,' _a combien de
pas _(_24_ 8) 'how many paces away'.

_18_ 27 _premier sujet:_ 'star,' in the company of players.

_18_ 31 _encore!_ 'too!'

_18_ 32 _n'en pouvait supporter:_ on _en_ cf. note to _8_ 19.

_18_ 33 _lui monta au visage:_ 'mounted to his face', cf._12_ 25, _45_ 8.

_19_ 1 _D'un geste:_ 'with a gesture', cf. note to _51_ 20.

_19_ 5 _He be...:_ Provencal for _eh bien!_ 'Well, but....'

_19_ 8 _emboitant le pas:_ a military expression, 'marching in lock step'_.

_19_ 14 _kabyle:_ cf. note to _40_ 17 The Kabyle woman's dress, which
reaches not quite to the ankles, is loose and held in at the waist, her
feet and arms are bare, she wears bracelets and anklets.

_19 19 _pensionnaires_: 'boarders,' here referring to the animals.

_19_ 20 _jeta un froid:_ 'threw cold water,' 'chilled the enthusiasm'.

_19_ 27 _se trouva:_ 'was', cf. note to _13_ 22.

_20_ 7 _perruque:_ 'wig,' here applied to the lion's mane (_criniere_, _1_
16).

_20_ 10 _soit que ... soit que:_ 'either because ('be it that') or
because'--_donne de l'humeur._ 'made ill-tempered' _Humeur_ usually
means 'ill humor' in French.

_20_ 13 _en leur baillant an nez a tous:_ cf. note to _12_ 25 _A tous_ is
in apposition with _leur_, hence the dative case, cf._17_ 1-2. When _tous_
is a pronoun the _s_ is sounded, cf. below, _1_ 19.

_20_ 26 _Ca, oui, c'est une chasse:_ 'that, now, that's a hunt worth
while!'

_21_ 10-12 _Et autrement ... au moins:_ 'I say, you surely have heard
the news--That depends What is it? Tartarin's departure, perhaps?' _Et
autrement_ and _au moins_ cannot be translated literally See the
paragraph following in the text.

_21_ 15 _mouain:_ = _moins_ misspelled to indicate a pronuntiation as two
syllables instead of one.

_21_ 16 _a faire trembler:_ cf. note to _2_ 2.

_21_ 19 _ce que c'est que la vanite:_ the construction will be clear if a
second _est_ is supplied after _vanite_, 'what vanity is', cf. note to
_72_ 21.

_21_ 22 _fit:_ = _dit_ There are many examples of this usage in this book.

_21_ 23 _je ne dis pas:_ 'I don't say (that I shan't),' 'I won't commit
Myself'.

_22_ 12 _fit ... effroyable:_ 'gave Tartarin-Quixote a terrible grilling'.

_22_ 16 _elephantiasis:_ 'elephantiasis,' a disease of the skin which
makes it thick, hard, and fissured like an elephant's hide.

_22_ 21 _feu Cambyse:_ 'the late Cambyses' _feu_ is frequently used, but
only with humorous intent, in speaking of persons long since dead. For the
story of the expedition (525 B.C.) sent by Cambyses, king of Persia, to
plunder the temple of Jupiter Ammon in the desert of Libya, see Herodotus
III Cambyses himself did not perish in this expedition as Daudet
erroneously states.

_22_ 27 _que diable!_ 'hang it all!'

_22_ 30 _Mungo-Park_ (1771-1806, no hyphen in English) Scotch explorer
of the Niger--_Caille_ (Rene, 1799-1838) a Frenchman, the first European
to return alive from Timbuktu.

_22_ 31 _Livingstone_ (David, 1813-1873) celebrated Scotch missionary and
traveler--_Duveyrier_(1840-1892) French geographer, and explorer of the
northwestern Sahara.

_23_ 3 _a partir de ce jour-la:_ 'from that day on'--_ne ... plus que:_
cf. note to _4_ 23.

_23_ 10 _faire son tour de ville:_ cf. note to _12_ 21.

_23_ 11 _pas accelere:_ 'quick time', _pas redouble_, 'double quick', _pas
gymnastique_, 'run.'

_23_ 13 _selon la mode antique:_ there is no evidence that ancient runners
carried pebbles in their mouths Daudet is perhaps thinking of the well
known story about Demosthenes Modern runners carry something, not usually
pebbles, in their mouths to induce themselves to hold the mouth shut and
breathe through the nose, and also to keep the mouth moist by inciting the
flow of saliva.

_23_ 16 _jusqu'a des dix et onze heures:_ 'even as late as ten and eleven
o'clock' _Des_ and _et_ (instead of _ou_, 'or) lend emphasis to the
Expression.

_23_ 27 _ne battait plus que d'une aile:_ 'was almost dead', lit 'could no
longer flap more than one wing' (like a wounded bird), cf. note to _4_ 23.

_24_ 1 _mouches cantharides:_ 'Spanish flies' These insects, which are
found in southern Europe, are used (crushed) as the chief element in
blistering plasters--_dessus_ adverb, 'on top of it', cf. note to _1_ 6.

_24_ 3 _Il fallait voir:_ 'you should have seen', cf._69_ 4.

_24_ 4 _se l'arrachait:_ for _se_ cf. note to _7_ 2 _Se_ is dative, cf. _4_
24.

_24_ 6 _se faire expliquer:_ cf. note to _7_ 25.

_24_ 7 _comment on s'y prenait:_ 'how you go at it' On y cf. note to _2_
29.

_24_ 8 _a combien de pas:_ cf. note to _18_ 25.

_24_ 11 _Jules Gerard_ (1817-1864) called _le Tueur de lions_, an officer
of spahis (cf. note to _43_ 8) and celebrated lion hunter.

_24_ 12 _Aussi:_ cf. note to _5_ 32.

_24_ 16 _que_ = _quand_ cf. note to _5_ 1.

_24_ 21 _disait:_ cf. note to _7_ 26.

_24_ 22 _laurier-rose:_ 'oleander', all parts of this shrub are poisonous.

_24_ 23 _pluies de sauterelles:_ particularly in Africa and Asia migratory
locusts collect in countless numbers, forming a cloud so dense as to
obscure the sun, and consume every green thing, cf._81_ 25 and note to
_86_ 20 See the pages on "Les Sauterelles" in "Lettres de mon moulin,"
where Daudet describes an invasion of these terrible insects.

_24_ 29 _balle explosible:_ a bullet which explodes on striking an object.

_24_ 30 _pfft!_ the sound of the bullet passing through the air.

_25_ 2 _garconnets:_ 'urchins,' diminutive of _garcon_, cf. note to _33_
27.

_25_ 3 _grand'peur:_ cf._grand'mere, grand'peine_, etc The Latin
adjectives of two terminations (_grandis, e_) had regularly in French one
form (_grand_) for masculine and feminine An _e_ was added in the feminine
through the influence of other feminine adjectives (_bonne_, from _bona_),
but the old form is retained, with the addition of the apostrophe, in
certain phrases Pronounce as if _grand'_ were masculine.

_25_ _chapter heading_ _pas de_ on the absence of _ne_ cf. note to _13_ 1.

_25_ 9 _Toujours est-il que:_ 'at any rate' On the inversion after
_toujours_ (still ') cf. note to _5_ 32.

_25_ 11 _peut-etre ... se figurait-il_ the same inversion as that referred
to in the preceding note. Compare in the next sentence _Peut etre qu(e) il
s'imaginait_.

_25_ 18 _le:_ 'it,' that is, _victime,_ omit in translation cf._59_ 13,
_84_ 3.

_25_ 22 _fit fureur:_ 'was all the rage', of _cette piece (de theatre)
fait fureur_ 'this play is all the rage'.

_26_ 2 _ne faisait plus foi:_ 'was no longer regarded as unimpeachable'.

_26_ 5 _faisait deux doigts de cour a:_ 'courted a little' (two finger
Breadths).

_26_ 6 _langue du cru:_ 'local dialect,' 'vernacular' _Cru_ means
'growth,' 'that which grows in a certain district', _croitre_ = 'grow'
_Vin du cru_ ='local wine', _donner une oeuvre de son cru_ = 'to produce a
work of one's own imagination', cf._dame du cru_ _60_ 29, _jurons du cru_
_65_ 4.

_26_ 9 _devait:_ cf. note to _18_ 2.

_26_ 10 _on le chargeait toujours:_ cf. _11_ 12.

_26 12 _l'allusion:_ like Master Gervais's gun, Tartarin never went off,
_partir_ = 'to depart,' 'to go off' (of a gun).

_26 13 _En un tour de main:_ 'in a turning of the hand,' 'like a flash'.

_26_ 16 _Le fusil de maitre Gervais--Toujours on le charge, toujours on
le charge--Le fusil de maitre Geivais--Toujours on le charge, il ne part
Jamais_.

_26_ 24 _lui glisser dans la main:_ 'slipping in (i.e. out of) his hand'.

_26_ 27 _il fait bon:_ 'it's a pleasant thing'.

_26_ 30 _sa meme vie:_ 'the same life as before '--_comme si de rien
n'etait_ 'as if it was (all) about nothing,' 'as if it all amounted to
Nothing'.

_27_ 4 _portait toute sa barbe:_ 'wore a full beard'.

_27_ 14 _s'adresser:_ cf. note to _5_ 23--_fouchtras_ transl.  rascals'
_Fouchtra_ is an inelegant exclamation, originally peculiar to the
inhabitants of Auvergne (south central France), hence, used as a noun it
means a person from Auvergne Many bootblacks come from Auvergne, so the
word is not inappropriately applied to the little Savoyard bootblacks.

_27_ 16 _tenait bon:_ 'stood its ground firmly', adverbial use of the
adjective cf._sentir bon_ and the corresponding English 'to smell good'.

_27_ 26 _gante ... oreilles:_ 'with black gloves on, (his coat) buttoned
up to his ears' With _boutonne_ cf._sangle_ _9_ 20.

_27_ 27 _fit:_ cf. note to 21_ 22.

_28_ 8 _il lui prit la main:_ 'he took his hand', cf. note to _12_ 25.

_28_ 12 _Bompard:_ the personages of "Tartarin de Tarascon" appear
in other novels of Daudet. For Bompard see particularly "Numa Roumestan."

_28_ 13 _CAISSE D'ARMES:_ 'WEAPON-CHEST.'

_28_ 18 _toute une cargaison:_ 'a whole cargo', cf._33_ 2-3.

_28_ 19 _pemmican:_ 'pemmican', dried meat, pulverized or shredded, and
mixed with melted fat, for Arctic rather than tropical use.

_28_ 20 _tente-abri:_ a light, easily-handled tent, used particularly by
troops in the field. _Abri_, masculine, = 'shelter.'

_28_ 21 _a la:_ here = 'in a.'

_28_ 24 _vinaigre des quatre-voleurs:_ 'thieves' vinegar,' a kind of
aromatic vinegar, formerly used as a disinfectant. The name is derived
from the fact that this concoction was popularly supposed to have rendered
immune from contagion certain thieves who were pillaging the city of
Toulouse during a severe plague (1720).

_28_ 26 _ce qu'il en faisait:_ on _en_ cf. note to _8_ 19.--_ce n'etait
pas pour lui:_ 'it wasn't for him,' i.e. it wasn't for Tartarin-Quixote.

_29_ 10 _grelots ... sonnettes:_ the _grelot_ is sounded by a ball inside,
as in a sleigh bell. _Sonnette_ is a broader term, used for any small
bell. _Une cloche_ is a large bell; cf._31_ 25.

_29_ 11 _Arles:_ an ancient city on the Rhone, nine miles south of
Tarascon. Its women, of a marked Greek type, are famed for their beauty,
which is enhanced by a very picturesque head-dress (_coiffe_).
--_venues en croupe de leur galant:_ 'riding behind their sweethearts.'
Note that _leur galant_ is singular; cf. _ses deux fusils dans leur gaine_
_71_ 25; cf. also note to _92_ 15, and _Savoyards ... la tete ... leurs_
_1 _8. We say 'arms bare to the elbow', cf. _19 _14-15.

_29_ 18 _Mesopotamie:_ 'Mesopotamia,' that part of Asia which lies between
the Tigris and the Euphrates.

_29_ 22 _tracant ... sillons glorieux:_ 'leaving, as it were, glorious
furrows in their wake.' Note the force of _comme_; cf._31_ 19, _34_ 9.

_29_ 25 _laissant voir:_ 'permitting to be seen'; cf. note to _7_ 25.

_30_ 3 _il se fit:_ cf. note to _5_ 23.

_30_ 12 _avait cru de son devoir ... de:_ 'had thought it his duty ... to.'

_30_ 14 _en toile blanche:_ _en_ is used to denote the material of which a
thing is made. _De_ also may be used: _une table d'acajou_, but we find
_des commodes en acajou_ _82_ 7; cf. _un sac de cuir_ _51_ 4, _une
serviette en cuir_ _71_ 14.

_30_ 16 _chechia:_ the cap worn by the natives of Algeria; as used by
the Algerian sharpshooters of the French army it is somewhat like a fez
(note to _33_ 25), but less close.

_30_ 17 _d'une longueur_: for the suppression cf. note to _15_ 21.

_30_ 22 _venaient la bien a propos_: 'came in quite opportunely.'

_30_ 26 _a quoi s'en tenir sur_: 'what to expect from' _En_ is redundant.

_30_ 29 _son ... chez lui_: 'his ... home'; _mon chez moi_ = 'my home.'

_30_ 30 _ne se voyait pas_: 'was not seen,' 'did not appear', cf. note to
_5_ 23.

_31_ 5 _vieil Africain de 1830_: 'African veteran of 30', cf. note to _40_
17.

_31_ 6 _lui serra la main_: cf. note to _12_ 25.

_31_ 7 _express Paris-Marseille_: 'express from Paris to Marseilles.'

_31_ 9 _fit fermer les grilles_: cf. note to _7_ 25.

_31_ 13 _On s'inscrivait_: _inscrire_ = 'to inscribe,' 'to enter,' as on a
register; _s'inscrire_= 'to enter one's name.'

_31_ 15 _Socrate_: 'Socrates,' famous Athenian philosopher(470-400 B.C.),
convicted of impiety and of corrupting the youth, was condemned to drink
the poisonous hemlock. He conversed calmly with his friends until the end.
See Plato's "Apology", "Crito" and "Phaedo".

_31_ 16 _cigue_. the diaeresis is written over the _e_ to show that the
_u_ is pronounced, [sigy]; contrast the pronunciation of _figue_.

_31_ 19 _comme_: cf. note to _29_ 22.

_31_ 20 _D'entendre_: 'as a result of hearing,' 'on hearing.'

_31_ 23 _hommes d'equipe_: 'station hands' An _equipe_ is a gang of men
engaged on a particular piece of work.

_31_ 25 _cloche_: the large bell which announced the approach of the
train. On words for 'bell' cf. note to _29_ 10.

_31_ 31 _monta dans un wagon_: 'got into a car' _Monter_ is always
followed by _dans_ when used in this sense, cf. _entrer dans une maison_
'to enter a house' cf. note to _94_ 9.

_31_ 32 _penserent mourir_ = _faillirent mourir_ (cf. _15_ 13): 'almost
died.'

_32_ 1 _1er_ =_premier._--par: cf. note to _10_ 22.

_32_ 3 _deboucher_: used of rivers ('empty into'), streets ('terminate
at'), armies ('debouch'). Here used for comic effect; transl. 'debouch.'
--la Canebiere: the principal Street of Marseilles, of which the
inhabitants are very proud.

_32_ 5 _s'il en manque ... des Teurs_: _des Teurs_ is anticipated by _en_;
cf. _36_ 19, _38_ 32, _69_ 2.

_32_ 10 _le Zouave_. the corps of French infantry in Algeria called
'zouaves' was organized in 1831. It was at first composed almost entirely
of natives (hence the well-known costume which is still worn), but is now
made up exclusively of Frenchmen.--devait: cf. note to _18_ 2.

_32_ 14 _pour la premiere fois_: cf. _13_ 26-27.

_32_ 16 _Sinbad le Marin_ 'Sindbad the Sailor,' the hero of a well-known
series of stories in the "Arabian Nights" ("Mille et une nuits")

_32_ 17 _comme il y en a_: 'such as there are', cf._49_ 8.

_32_ 19 _a perte de vue_: 'as far as the eye could reach'.

_32_ 21 _tunisiens_: Tunis was independent when "Tartarin" was written,
and has the flag of an independent state to this day. Note that this
fragmentary list names only the flags less often seen.

_32_ 22 _arrivant sur_: 'projecting over'.

_32_ 23 _Au-dessous/_ (adv, cf._1_ 6) _les naiades ... saintes vierges_:
just below the bowsprit is a figure head representing the naiad (water
nymph), the goddess, or the madonna, whose name is inscribed on both sides
of the bow. _Les saintes vierges_ are images of the Virgin, which are
particularized by specific attitudes, attributes, or localities Read "La
Diligence de Beaucaire", in "Lettres de mon moulin".

_32_ 29 _mousses_: _le mousse_='cabin boy,' _la mousse_='moss,' 'foam'.

_33_ 2 _tout un peuple_: cf. note to _28_ 18.

_33_ 4 _bogheys_: borrowed from the English 'buggy' _Paquebot_ (_32_ 10)
is from Engl. 'packet-boat,' and _redingote_ (_34_ 6) is from Engl.
'riding coat'

_33_ 8 _bric-a-brac_: this word means 'bric-a-brac' (odds and ends), 'a
dealer in bric-a-brac,' or his store, 'curiosity shop,' as here.

_33_ 9 _coulevrines_: 'culverins,' an obsolete form of cannon.

_33_ 11 _Jean Bart_ (1651-1702): a famous sailor and privateer, of low
birth, ennobled by Louis XIV. _Duguay-Trouin_ (1673-1736) privateer and
naval commander.

_33_ 18 _saumons_: 'salmon' (fish), in metallurgy 'pigs' (here, of lead)
A pig is an oblong mass of cast metal, especially iron or lead.

_33_ 19 _caroubes_: 'carob beans,' the sweet pulpy pods, dried, of the
_caroubier_ (_76_ 24), a tree of the countries bordering the
Medditerranean, the "husks" of Luke xv, 16, and sometimes sold as a dainty
at American fruit stands--_colzas_ colza, or rape, is a sort of turnip
with no thick root, raised for the oil of its seeds and for pasturage.

_33_ 20 _de Hollande_: 'Dutch' The hard Edam cheese, made in globular
molds and dyed red on the outside, is familiar to Americans.

_33_ 21 _Genoises_: women of Genoa (_Genes_), seaport in northern Italy.

_33_ 25 _fez_: 'fez', named from the city of Fez in Morocco, where it is
made a felt or cloth cap, dark red, with a tassel--_a mesure_: 'in
proportion as it fell ', cf. note to _58_ 18.

_33_ 27 _de femmes et d'enfants_: they followed to pick up (glean,
_glaner_) what fell from the carts--_balayette_ dimmutive of _balai_
cf._colline, collinette_ _4_ 11, _garcon, garconnet_ _25_ 2, _seul,
seulet_ _63_ 18, _seulette_.

_33_ 28 _bassin de carenage_: 'dry dock' _Carenage_ 'careenage' = a place
for, or the act of, careening a ship for the purpose of examining or
repairng its hull or keel (_carene_).

_34_ 3 _Malte_: 'Malta,' an island in the Mediterranean, between Sicily
and Africa, which has belonged to England since 1814.

_34_ 9 _comme en l'air_: 'as if they were sailing in the air', cf. note to
_29_ 22.

_34_ 12 _fort Saint-Jean, fort Saint-Nicolas_: the two forts which guard
the entrance to the harbor of Marseilles.

_34_ 13 _la Major_: the old cathedral of Marseilles (_Sainte Marie
Majeure_).--_Accoules, Saint-Victor_: old churches in Marseilles.

_34_ 14 _mistral_: (Latin _magistralis_ 'masterly') 'mistral,' a violent
north-west wind which sweeps down the Rhone valley.

_35_ 12 _golfe du Lion_: 'Gulf of the Lion,' off southern France.

_36_ 2 _casque a meche_: used jocosely for 'night cap' _Casque = 'helmet',
_meche = 'wick,' _meche de cheveux_ = 'lock of hair.' A helmet with a
flowing crest resembles a night cap with its tassel--_jusqu'aux ...
bleme_: 'to the ears of a pale sufferer's head.'

_36_ 10 _comme ... voulu_: _en vouloir a quelqu'un_ means 'to bear a
grudge against a person.' _Il en veut a Jean_ = 'he bears a grudge against
John.' Here 'how angry they would have been with themselves!' 'how they
would have reproached themselves!'

_36_ 13 _courage_: 'energy.' The word _courage_ (ordinarily = English
'courage') is often so used. _Je n'ai pas le courage de travailler
aujourd'hui_ 'I haven't the energy to work (do not feel like working) to
day.' Cf. _50_ 1.

_36_ 15 _cuir_: 'leather (case).'

_36_ 16 _ne cessait_: _pas_ is often omitted with _savoir, pouvoir,
cesser, oser, bouger_, cf. _18_ 32, _86_ 3.

_36_ 18 _Imbecile, va!_: 'what a fool you are!' _Va! allez!_ and _allons!_
(imperatives of _aller_) are common exclamations, the sense varies with
the context. For _allons!_ cf. _56_ 1--_Je te l'avais bien dit_ 'I told
you so.'

_36_ 19 _Eh bien ... l'Afrique!_: 'well now, here's your Africa!' On _te_
see note to _13_ 7. _La_ anticipates _l'Afrique_, cf. _32_ 5.

_36_ 27 _la Mecque_: 'Mecca,' in Arabia, the birthplace of Mohammed;
the Holy City to which every good Mohammedan goes in pilgrimage at least
once.

_36_ 25 _Alcazar_: a music-hall. _Alcazar_ means in Arabic 'the palace.'

_36_ 28 _Ravel, Gil Peres_: popular comedians in Paris at the time Daudet
was writing.

_36_ 30 _un bon gros vivant de Marseillais:_ a _bon vivant_ is 'a man who
lives well,' 'a jolly fellow' On _de see note to _1_ 12.

_37_ 3 _il se fit:_ cf. note to _5_ 23.

_37_ 7 _Machine en avant! machine en arriere!_ 'Go ahead! back her!'
_Machine_ = 'engine'.

_37_ 9 _Machine, stop!_ 'stop her!' 'The verb _stopper_ (borrowed from
English _stop_) is regularly used of engines. _Stop_ in _machine, stop!_
is an imperative taken directly from the English.

_37_ 10 _plus rien:_ cf. notes to _13_ 1 and _4_ 23--_Rien que:_ cf. _1_
17.

_37_ 19 _Alger la blanche:_ 'Algiers,' capital of Algeria, about 500 miles
from Marseilles. For the epithet _blanche_, see next note.

_37_ 22 _Meudon:_ a town on the Seine between Paris and Versailles. The
white houses of Algiers sloping towards the sea look like the washing of a
laundress spread out on the grassy hill which at Meudon descends to the
Seine. _Etalage_ means a 'spreading out,' as of things for sale; then, by
extension, the objects displayed. Cf. note to _69_ 15.

_37_ 26 _a ses cotes:_ 'at his (Tartarin's) side'; note the plural
_cotes_; cf. _aux flancs du paquebot_ _93_ 19.

_37_ 27 _Casbah:_ the citadel, 400 feet above the sea, crowning the hill
on which the Moorish quarter (la ville haute 'the Upper City e') is built
--_la rue Bab-Azoun:_ lower down, parallel to the shore, the most
important street in Algiers.

_38_ 9 _ILS:_ cf. pages 10-11.

_38_ 18 _Ques aco?_ Provencal for _qu'est ce que c'est que cela?_ 'what's
that?'--_qu'est-ce que vous avez?'_ 'what's the matter with you?'

_38_ 21 _pourquoi faire?_ 'why?' 'what for?' cf. _49_ 1.--boun Diou:_
Provencal for _bon Dieu_.

_38_ 31 _tron de ler:_ more properly _tron de l'er_, a Provencal oath =
_tonnerre  de l'air_, 'thunder of the air!' A Provencal newspaper with the
name _Lou Tron de l'Er_ appeared in Marseilles in 1877-1878.

_38_ 32 _longtemps:_ cf. note to _40_ 17.--_en:_ anticipates _des
pirates_; cf. note to _32_ 5.

_39_ 4 _un brave garcon:_ cf. note to _3_ 12.

_39_ 8 _tire-vieille:_ 'man-rope,' one of the side ropes on the gangway
of a ship. _Tire-vieille_ (_tirer_ + _vieille_,' that which helps old
women to mount') is often misspelled _tire-veille_ (_tirer_ + _veille_,
'pull and take care').

_39_ 17 _tourmentait:_ 'tormented,' 'twisted and turned.'

_39_ 23 _barbaresque:_ 'Barbary.' _La Barbarie_ ('Barbary') = _Etats
barbaresques_ is a general term formerly applied to the North African
states: Morocco, Algeria, Tunis, and Tripoli.

_39_ 24 _Michel Cervantes:_ in 1575 Cervantes was captured by Barbary
pirates and carried to Algiers. His five years of slavery afforded him
materials for "Don Quixote" and other works; cf. note to _10_ 13.

_39_ 20 _sous le baton de:_ 'under the cudgel used upon.'

_39_ 26 _devait:_ cf. note to _18_ 2.

_40_ 1 _Saavedra:_ upon his return from Algiers in 1580 Cervantes assumed
the additional surname of _Saavedra_ from one of his ancestors, always
signing himself thenceforth _Cervantes Saavedra_.

_40_ 4 _dut tressaillir:_ 'must have leaped', cf. note to _2_ 10.

_40_ 14 _a peine Tartarin eut-il mis:_ cf. note to _5_ 32.

_40_ 17 _Arabes ...  M'zabites:_ the aborigines of Algeria, three quarters
of the population even now, are the Berber race, including the Kabyles
(_19_ 14) in the north, the Mzabites, purest Berbers of all, in the south,
and the marauding Tuaregs (_11_ 6) in the Sahara. The Mzabites, the
heretical Puritans of Algerian Mohammedanism, are seen everywhere as
honest petty traders and workers in street industries. The Arab conquest
about 700 A.D. made Arabic the dominant language of all North Africa to
this day--an important fact to remember--and introduced the Arabs as a
permanent population along the north edge of the Sahara. The conquest by
Turkish pirates about 1500 A.D., with subordination to the Sultan of
Turkey till 1669, brought in very few Turks; the pirates were a mixture of
various Mohammedan nations with renegades from the Christian nations. The
"Moors" of to-day in Algeria are their descendants; the ancient Moors were
Berbers. During the centuries of pirate rule, and earlier, negroes were
brought in as slaves; Mohammedan custom favored setting them free in a few
years if they became Mohammedans. The overthrow of the pirates by the
French in 1830, and the French conquest during the next thirty years,
caused most of the few Turks to leave the country, and started an influx
of Europeans from the Mediterranean countries; Daudet notices especially
the Minorcans (_Mahonnais_ from the city of Port Mahon).

_40 22 _charabia:_ borrowed from the Spanish _algarabia_, which means
properly 'Arabic,' then, by extension, any unintelligible 'jargon.' The
French word is usually applied contemptuously to the dialect of Auvergne
(cf. note to _27_ 14).

_40_ 23 _invraisemblables:_ lit. 'unlike the truth,' 'improbable', then
'strange,' 'outlandish', of German _unwahrscheinlich_.

_40_ 26 _se faire comprendre:_ cf. note to _7_ 25.--_barbares:_
'barbarians,' the word used by Greeks and Romans to designate uncivilized
peoples. Not to be confused with barbaresque.

_40_ 28 _du latin de Pourceaugnac:_ 'Pourceaugnac Latin,' meaningless
Latin such as that which Moliere introduces into some of his plays.
"Monsieur de Pourceaugnac" is the name of one of Moliere's farces, and
there is some Latin in it; but Daudet probably had in mind "Le Medecin
malgre lui," II, 6. He uses the name _Pourceaugnac_ here because he likes
the sound. _Rosa, rosae,_ is the type-noun of the first declension in
French grammars of to-day, where we have ordinarily _mensa_ or _stella_.
In Moliere's time, as suggested by the passage of "Le Medecin malgre lui"
referred to, _musa, musae_, was the noun commonly used.

_41_ 2 _Heureusement qu':_ _que_ is redundant, cf. _58_ 23.

_41_ 3 _canne de compagnon:_ 'stout cane.' When the young artisan
(_compagnon_) set out on his travels (_tour de France_) to learn his
trade, he carried a stout cane which is one of the principal attributes of
_compagnonnage_.

_41_ 4 _dieu d'Homere:_ in the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" the gods often
intervene in the affairs of men.

_41_ 11 _tenant le milieu entre:_ 'a cross between.'

_41_ 12 _Zanzibar:_ capital, since 1832, of the Mohammedan power in East
Africa, and place of entry for travelers to Central Africa in the middle
of the nineteenth century; hence here representing the idea of an African
capital, as Constantinople that of a Turkish capital.

_41_ 13 _en plein Tarascon:_ cf. note to _5_ 7.

_41_ 15 _la ligne:_ in the French and English armies the term la _ligne_,
'the line,' is applied ordinarily to the infantry of the regular army as
opposed to the militia, cavalry, artillery, etc. In America _the line_
includes all that part of the regular army whose business is actual
fighting.--_Offenbach:_ Jacques Offenbach (1819-1880), born at Cologne, a
naturalized Frenchman, composer of light operas.

_41_ 24 _Crusoe:_ the final _e_ of English proper names terminating in -oe
is ordinarily pronounced in French; cf. _Edgard Poe_ or _Poe_.

_41_ 28 _monter:_ the active use of this verb, 'carry up', cf. promener
_74_ 26.

_42_ 1 _Gouvernement:_ the building in which are the offices of the
provincial government. Cf. _70_ 8.

_42_ 4 _en avait vu de rudes:_ 'had had a hard time of it', with rudes
supply some such noun as _choses_, anticipated by _en_; cf. note to _32_
5.

_42_ 14 _il se fit servir:_ cf. note to _7_ 25.--_grande ouverte:_ 'wide
open'; cf. _51_ 7.

_42_ 15 _Crescia:_ a wine-producing district near Algiers.

_42_ 21 _dejeuner:_ verb.

_42_ 22 _freter:_ 'to charter,' a nautical term used here
mock-heroically.

_42_ 26 _montait d'un bon pied:_ note the _de_ with expressions of
measure, _haute de cinq doigts_ (_71_ 14) 'five fingers high,' _il est
plus grand_ (_plus age_) _de deux pouces_ (_deux ans_) 'he is two inches
(two years) taller (older)'; cf. _95_ 8.

_42_ 28 _enfila:_ _enfiler_ = 'to thread (a needle, pearls, etc.)', then,
'to thread (one's way through arcades, crowded streets, etc).'

_43_ 2 _prit le faubourg:_ 'took the street which leads through the
suburb.' _Faubourg_ meant originally the portion of a city outside the
walled town (_bourg_); then also the street leading through this district.
Cf. note to _49_ 7.--_route de Mustapha:_ 'Mustapha road', cf. note to _1_
5. Mustapha is a suburb of Algiers, on the sea.

_43_ 4 _corricolos:_ _corricolo_ is the Neapolitan word (Latin
'curriculum, 'chariot'; see _curricle_ in Engl. dict.) for a sort of gig.
--_fourgons du train:_ 'army wagons', _train_ = _train des equipages_,
'the train,' an army's equipment for the transportation of provisions and
other necessities.

_43_ 5 _chasseurs d'Afrique:_ French light cavalry serving in Algeria;
transl. 'Africa cavalry.'

_43_ 7 _Alsaciens emigrants:_ 'emigrating Alsatians'; contrast _emigres
alsaciens_ 'Alsatian emigrants.' After the Franco-Prussian war (1870-871),
as a result of which Alsace became a German province, many Alsatians
emigrated rather than submit to German domination. In 1871 about 11,000
natives of Alsace-Lorraine were granted land in Algeria. Daudet visited
Algeria in 1861, before the Alsatians immigrated in large numbers.

_43_ 8 _spahis:_ 'spahis,' native cavalry in the French service, commanded
by French officers.

_43_ 12-13 _bouchers:_ 'butchers.'--_equarrisseurs:_ 'slaughterers.'
_Equarisseur_, probably because of a falsely imputed connection with Latin
_equus_, is ordinarily used to mean 'horse slaughterer,' 'knacker.' The
root of the word is, however, Latin _quadratus_, French _carre_, and an
_equarisseur_ is properly 'one who cuts a beast into quarters,' one whose
chief interest is in the by-products--hide, bones, fat, etc.

_43_ 20 _ne devaient pas etre:_ 'ought not to be,' 'surely were not,'
'could not be', see note to _2_ 10.

_43_ 29 _crut devoir:_ 'thought he had better'; see note to _2_ 10.

_43_ 31 _Et autrement:_ cf. note to _21_ 10.

_44_ 1 _Vous avez tue? ... voyez plutot:_ 'killed any? Oh, yes
--some--just take a look for yourself.' With _pas mal 'not badly' cf.
_j'ai tue pas mal de becasses_ 'I killed quite a number of woodcocks.'

4_4_ 7 _c'est des tout petits:_ popular for _ce sont_, cf. _90_ 26.

_44_ 11 _en resta plante:_ 'stood rooted (to the spot)', cf. note to _12_
31 _En_ = _de cela_, 'at all this', cf. note to _8_ 19.

_44_ 15 _se faisaient:_ 'were becoming', cf. note to _5_ 23.

_44_ 28 _Sous ... etoiles:_ 'in the dim starlight'--_leur ombre_ cf. note
to _29_ 11.

_45_ 8 _en 1ui tirant la patte:_ _en tirant la patte au chevreau_, cf.
_lui faisant battre le coeur_ _53_ 16.

_45_ 13 _que le lion l'entendit:_ colloquial omission of _ne_, which is
regularly used with verbs of fearing, avoiding, etc, eg _j'ai peur qu'il
ne vienne_ 'I fear that he may come.'

_45 15 _de plus belle:_ cf. note to _8_ 18.

_45_ 19 _Cela se baissait ... s'arretait net:_ an admirable description

_45_ 21 _a n'en pas douter:_ 'no doubt of it!' cf. note to _2_ 2.

_45_ 24 _En joue! feu!_ 'aim! fire!' _Mettre_ (_coucher_) _en joue un
fusil_ = 'to aim a gun' _Mettre_ (_coucher_) _en joue quelque chose_ = 'to
aim at a thing.'

_45_ 29 _Il en a!_ 'he has (caught) it!' 'he's hit!' LIT. 'he has some.'

_45_ 30 _en avait ... compte:_ 'had more than it wanted.'

_46_ 7 _venir a bout de:_ 'come to (the) end of' 'succeed '.

_46_ 8 _Il eut beau s'escrimer:_ on _avoir beau_ cf. note to _11_ 9.
_Escrimer_ = 'to fence,' _s'escrimer_ = 'to exert oneself.'

_46_ 9 _ne s'ouvrit pas:_ cf. note to _5_ 23.

_46_ 11 _De guerre lasse:_ for _de guerre las_ 'tired of struggling.'
Final _s_ was pronounced in Old French, after it was no longer pronounced
in most words it still continued to be sounded in _las_ in the expression
_de guerre las_ because of the presence of the feminine _guerre whence the
erroneous spelling _lasse_.

_46_ 12 _dessus:_ adverb, cf. note to _1_ 6.

_46_ 19 _artichauts:_ the true or globe artichoke (not to be confounded
with the Jerusalem artichoke) resembles a large thistle, and hence is
well adapted to give the impression described in _44_ 26-27.

_46_ 24 _bastides, bastidons:_ Provencal _bastido_ = 'country house,'
'villa', Provencal _bastidoun_ is the diminutive, = 'little villa,'
'cottage.'

_47_ 6 _parbleu!_ euphemistic for _pardieu_, transl. 'of course!'

_47_ 8 _bourriquots:_ cf. Engl. _burro_, which is borrowed from the
Spanish French _bourrique_ 'she ass' comes from the Provencal _bourric_
'donkey' (Latin _burricus_ a kind of small horse.)

_47_ 11 _tout a la pitie:_ 'entirely one of pity', cf. _79_ 30.

_47_ 16 _tout ce que ... touchant:_ 'the most touching thing you could
imagine.'

_47_ 18 _avait ... vie:_ 'had two farthings' worth of life left in him',
_liard_, an ancient coin worth a quarter of a sou (i.e. of a cent), is
usually translated 'farthing.'

_47_ 23 _Noiraud:_ 'Blacky,' a pet name often given to animals.

_47_ 28 _en marmotte:_ 'with a kerchief tied over her head.' This use
of the word _marmotte_ is derived from the fact that Savoyard women who
formerly traveled about the country with marmots (cf. note to _74_ 27)
employed this form of head covering.

_48_ 1 _reclamant ... Mustapha:_ 'shouting for her donkey till all the
echos of Mustapha rang.' _Reclamer a_ = 'to demand from.'

_48_ 6 _tarterfle:_ corruption of German _der Teufel_ 'the devil.' German
was the language generally used by the Alsatian peasants before the war,
though their sympathies were French (cf. note to _43_ 7) See "La Derniere
Classe" and some of the other stories in "Contes du lundi."

_48_ 11 _Va te promener!_ lit. 'go take a walk!' transl. 'much good it
did him!'--_sa vigueur le prouvait bien _'her vigor proved it (that she
was deaf) conclusively.' 'To strike like a deaf person,' _frapper comme
un sourd_, is said of one who uses the cudgel energetically and wildly,
as if he did not hear the laments of his victim.

_48_ 17 _l'on s'entendit:_ cf. note to _16_ 29.

_48_ 21 _douros:_ say 'dollars' or 'cash.' A duro is a Spanish coin whose
par value is now five francs, before 1871, a trifle more.

_48_ 20 _a deux lieues:_ cf. note to _4_ 8.

_49_ 1 _Ah! ben! merci:_ 'ah, indeed! no, thank you!' _Ben_ (pronounced
like _bain_) is popular for _bien Merci_ in answer to a question (e.g.
"will you have some more meat?") means "no, thank you!" Contrast English
'thank you,' which usually expresses assent--_pourquoi faire?_ cf. note to
_38_ 21.

_49 7 _banlieue:_ distinguish _banlieue_, 'suburbs' in the sense now
usual, the district of country surrounding a city and full of dependent
villages, from _faubourgs_, 'suburbs' in the older sense, forming a
continuous mass of houses with the main city, and _un village_ (or _une
ville_) _de_ (_la_) _banlieue_ from _un faubourg_. Cf. note to _43_ 2.

_49_ 8 _comme on en voit:_ cf. note to _32 17--_rameau:_ a branch hung out
was used formerly and is still used to a certain extent as the sign of a
country inn, of the English proverb "good wine needs no bush."

_49_ 11 _Au Rendez-vous des lapins:_ 'The Rabbits' Headquarters.' The
original expression _a l'enseigne de_, 'at the sign of,' became by
ellipsis _a_ plus the article, which takes the gender and number of the
noun following e.g. _a la Belle jardiniere, aux Armes de France._

_49_ 12 _O Bravida, quel souvenir!_ cf. _9_ 7.

_49_ 13 _de quoi:_ cf. note to _10_ 7.

_49_ 14 _ne se laissent pas abattre:_ cf. note to _7_ 25.

_49_ 24 _il faisait un soleil, une poussiere:_ _faire_ may be used in
almost any expression concerning the weather; _faire chaud, du soleil, du
vent, de la poussiere,_ etc. Here, 'it was so terribly hot, so dusty.'

_49_ 25 _d'un lourd:_ 'frightfully heavy', adjective used as an abstract
noun, of such English usages as 'of a decided red.' On the suppression
cf. note to _15_ 21.

_50_ 7 _fusils rayes a doubles canons:_ cf. note to _14_ 32. To rifle
(_rayer_) a gun is to cut spiral grooves in the barrel.

_50_ 8 _complet:_ French law requires that only a certain number of
passengers be carried on omnibuses. When this number is reached the
omnibus is said to be _complet_, 'filled.'

_50_ 14 _Abd-el-Kader:_ the great leader of Algerian resistance to the
French conquest. He surrendered in 1847, was carried to France as a
prisoner by a breach of faith, was released in 1852 on his oath to make no
more trouble, went to Damascus and lived there till his death in 1883,
using his influence in favor of the French. (Note that he was alive when
"Tartarin" was published.)

_50_ 19 _de toute la route:_ 'during the whole ride,' 'all the way.'

_50_ 21 _k'hol:_ 'kohl,' a powder used in the Orient from ancient times,
particularly to darken the eyes, thus making them seem larger and more
oblong.

_50_ 32 _Que faire?_ 'what was he to do?'

_51_ 3 _aux mains des:_ 'into the hands of the.'

_51_ 7 _s'ouvraient tout grands:_ 'opened wide', cf. _42_ 14.

_51_ 10 _a l'entree de:_ 'at the beginning of.'

_51_ 14 _en se levant:_ 'as she rose.'

_51_ 15 _qu'il l'effleura de son haleine:_ lit. 'that it (_le visage_)
touched him lightly with its breath', transl. 'that he felt her breath
sweep lightly over him.'

_51_ 17 _pret a tout:_ 'ready for anything.'

_51_ 18 _buffleteries:_ 'belts' (of a soldier's outfit), 'strappings.'
_Buffle_, masculine, = 'buffalo' or 'buff leather.'

_51 20 _de:_ 'with', _jeter de_ = 'to throw with', cf. _69_ 10.

_51_ 28 _De quelques jours encore:_ 'for a few days yet.'

_52_ 7 _pied de trappeur:_ transl. 'hunting boot.'

_52_ 8 _se parfume:_ cf. note to _5_ 23.

_52_ 9 _quoi qu'il fasse:_ 'whatever he does,' i.e. despite all his
efforts.

_52_ 10 _Maugrabine:_ 'Maghrebi girl' Maghreb is the Arabic name of
the western part of the north coast of Africa.

_52_ 13 _il n'y a qu'un Tarasconnais ... capable:_ lit. 'there is only a
Tarasconian capable', transl. 'only a Tarasconian would be capable.'

_52_ 17 _se ressemblent:_ 'look alike', cf. note to _7_ 2--_ces dames:_
cf. note to _16_ 13--_ne sortent guere:_ 'rarely leave their homes',
_sortir_ = 'to go out,' 'to leave the house.'

_52_ 18 _ville haute:_ cf. note to _37_ 27.

_52_ 25 _Teurs ... forbans:_ 'fierce Turks with pirate like heads', cf.
note to _1_ 5.

_52_ 29 _cite:_ 'city.' This term, in English as well as in French, is
applied in some cases to the oldest portion of a city, eg 'the City'
of London, 'the City' of Paris.

_53_ 3 _janissaires:_ 'janizaries,' the standing army of Turkey till 1826;
a corps of most turbulent history, full of lawless arrogance toward
civilians and Christians. The janizaries of Algiers became independent in
1669, and dominated the pirate commonwealth.

_53_ 5 _Huit jours durant:_ 'for a whole week.' _Durant_, 'during,' is
emphatic when it follows its noun, cf. _61_ 7.

_53_ 6 _faire le pied de grue:_ 'stand and wait,' lit. to stand like a
crane (i.e. on one foot.)

_53_ 7 _ces dames:_ cf. note to _16_ 13.

_53_ 9 _quitter ... bottes:_ shoes must be taken off (which is easy with
Oriental shoes) before one enters a Mohammedan sacred place. Cf. Exodus
III, 5.

_53_ 11 _s'en revenait:_ Cf. _s'en aller_ _17_ 4, _s'en retourner_ _2_ 8.

_53_ 15 _tambours de basque:_ 'tambourines,' called 'Biscayan drums'
because generally seen in the northern (Biscayan, Basque) provinces of
Spain.

_53_ 19 _poterne:_ 'postern,' a back door, and then, by extension, any
small door.

_53_ 23 _Tenons-nous bien:_ a phrase of warning to be on guard and ready,
transl. 'ware Turks!'--_Il_: cf. note to _4_ 23.

_54_ 1 _Il y avait ... cherchait:_ 'for two long weeks the luckless
Tartarin had been seeking.'

_54_ 4 _Voici:_ 'here is (how it happened).'

_54_ 6 _ni plus ni moins que l'Opera:_ 'just as the Opera does.' The
_Opera_ is the famous Opera House in Paris, where a great masked ball is
given every year.

_54_ 7 _de province:_ 'provincial' All France outside of Paris is
disdainfully designated by Parisians as _la province_. With _province do
not confuse _Provence_ (cf. note to _13 27)--_Peu de monde:_ 'few people.'

_54_ 8 _Bullier ... Casino:_ Parisian dance-halls--_vierges folles:_
'frail sisters.' In the French version of the parable of the Ten Virgins
(Matthew xxv, 1-12) the foolish virgins are called _vierges folles_.

_54_ 9 _chicards:_ 'dandies'--_debardeurs:_ men who unload wood,
'stevedores.' Conventionalized dandy and stevedore costumes were made
popular as early as the thirties by the clever cartoonist Gavarni and were
seen at all masked balls. The reference here is to frequenters of Parisian
masked balls who have found it advisable to leave France (_en deroute_)
and have carried their costumes with them.

_54_ 10 _se lancent:_ 'are launching out,' ='are getting started,' i.e. in
a disreputable life.

_54_ 12 _Le vrai coup d'oeil:_ 'the real spectacle', _coup d'oeil_ =
'glance,' and hence 'view' such as may be taken in all at once.

_54_ 15 _tapis verts:_ the green coverings of the gaming tables--turcos:
'Turcos,' native soldiers of the French army in Algeria.

_54_ 16 _pret:_ 'pay' of non commissioned officers and soldiers, called
_pret_ (cf. _preter_ 'to lend') because advanced to them before it is due.

_54_ 18 _l'argent d'une charrue:_ 'the price of a plow.'

_54_ 20 _trouble:_ adjective.

_54_ 29 _a barbe de Pere eternel:_ _le Pere etetnel_ is, of course, God.
The Middle Ages and the Renaissance did not scruple to represent him in
sculpture and painting. Transl. 'with a long white beard.'

_55_ 7 _la garde qui monte:_ 'the guard coming up.' Note that a French
relative clause is often to be rendered by a present participle in English
e g, _je l'entends qui frappe_ 'I hear him knocking.' Cf. _6_ 10, _64_ 18,
_68_ 9.

_55_ 8 _ces saturnales:_ 'this saturnalia' The Roman festival of Saturn
was a penod of riotous license--_etait venu s'egarer: 'had come straying',
cf. _93_ 19.

_55_ 10 _s'en allait:_ for _allait_, cf. note to _17_ 4.

_55_ 13 _M'sieu:_ indicates by the spelling the usual pronunciation of
_Monsieur_.

_55_ 15 _Apres?_ 'Well, what have you to say?'

_55_ 17 _Je ne demande pas mieux:_ 'I don't ask (anything) better,'
'that's exactly what I should like to know.'

_55_ 25 _algarade:_ a word borrowed from the Spanish, the root being
Arabic. It was originally a military expression meaning a raid, but now is
used more or less jocularly for a wordy attack. Transl. 'dispute.'

_55_ 26 _Me voila bien avance:_ 'I'm much farther along,' 'I'm much the
wiser' (sarcastically).

_55_ 28 _ca:_ = _cela_, 'that,' 'the thing Gregory du Montenegro,'
contemptuous when used of persons, cf. _69_ 32.

_55_ 30 _preince:_ Tartarin's Southern pronunciation of _prince_.

_56_ 1 _Allons!_ 'well!' cf. note to _36_ 18--_Partagez-vous ...
question:_ the officer in disgust bids the prince and Tartarin to divide
between them the twenty francs that are missing and let the matter drop.

_56_ 2 _qu'il n'en soit plus question:_ 'let's have no more talk about
it', cf. note to _4 23_.

_56_ 6 _j'en fais mon affaire:_ 'I'll attend to this.'

_56_ 12 _Barbarin:_ when this work first appeared in serial form Tartarin
was called "Barbarin." The name was changed when Daudet discovered that a
family named Barbarin was living at Tarascon. See Introduction. The word
_tartarin_ means the sacred or Arabian baboon.

_56_ 13 _souffla:_ 'prompted.' _Souffler_, 'to blow,' 'to breathe,' in
theatrical parlance means 'to prompt.' _Le souffleur_ is 'the prompter.'

_56_ 14 _Entre ... mort:_ 'between us now it's a compact for life and
death!'

_56_ 17 _Vous pensez:_ cf. note to _4_ 6.

_56_ 21 _terrasses:_ cf. note to _64_ 2.

_56_ 22 _salade russe:_ 'Russian salad,' a heavy fish and vegetable salad.

_56_ 25 _frise au petit fer:_ 'with fineiy curled hair.' _Friser au fer_ =
'to curl with an iron.'

_56_ 26 _rase a la pierre ponce:_ 'very closely shaven.' Pumice stone has
from ancient times been used by the effeminate for smoothing the skin.

_56_ 27 _lui donnait un faux air de:_ 'made him look like', lit 'gave him
a false air of.'

_56_ 28 _Mazarin:_ Giulio Mazarini (1602-1661), an Italian who became
cardinal, and prime minister under Louis XIII and Louis XIV, talked French
with an Italian accent. He wore the mustache and slight beard usual at
that period.

_56_ 29 _les langues latines:_ pompously for _la langue latine_--_a tout
propos:_ 'apropos of everything,' 'at every opportunity'--_Tacite:_
'Tacitus' (54-140 A.D.), the famous latin historian.

_56_ 30 _Horace_ (64-8 B.C.) the Latin lyric poet--_Commentaires:_ the
histories of the wars of Julius Caesar written by himself, with
supplements  by his officers, bear the Latin title _Commentarii_, i.e.
'Notebooks.'

_56_ 31 _hereditaire:_ transl. 'noble.'

_56_ 32 _depuis:_ adverb, 'since then', cf. note to _1_ 6.

_56_ 33 _en Altesse philosophe:_ 'in the role of philosophizing noble';
cf. note to _5_ 20.

_57_ 7 _bon:_ 'good natured,' 'kindly,' not 'good.'

_57_ 11 _On but sec:_ 'they drank hard.' _Boire sec_ means to drink pure
wine, without the usual admixture of water.

_57_ 12 _au Montenegro libre:_ Montenegrin independence was frequently
menaced by Turkey during the nineteenth century. In 1862, as a result of a
short but disastrous war, Montenegro had been forced to sign a humiliating
treaty of peace in which she virtually acknowledged the suzerainty of
Turkey. Daudet was in Africa in 1861-1862, gathering materials out of
which "Tartarin" grew. It is possible that he met there the prototype of
Gregory brooding over the disgrace of his country, or, at least,
pretending to do so. However, the character of the prince and the
information given in _56_ 31 ff lead us to suppose that in Gregory's mind
"a free Montenegro" means a Montenegro free from the existing
constitutional authorities, rather than free from Turkish domination.

_57_ 14 _qu'on secoue:_ 'being shaken,' cf. note to _55_ 7.

_57_ 18 _Parlez-moi des:_ 'just trust'--_lever ... la caille._ 'start the
game.' The usual expression is _lever le lievre_ 'to start the hare,' 'to
uncover something hidden.' A loose woman is sometimes called _caille_
('quail'), _caille coiffee_, hence the substitution of _caille_ for
_lievre_.

_57_ 20 _aux Platanes:_ = _au restaurant des Platanes_, cf. _56_ 20.

_58_ 4 _Bon!_ 'that's nothing!'--_vous n'etes pas homme:_ 'you are not the
sort of man.'

_58_ 5 _on ... a bout de:_ 'we'll perhaps be able to dispose of', cf. note
to _46_ 7.

_58_ 6 _lui achetant:_ cf. note to _5_ 27--_Allons:_ 'come now!' cf. notes
to _36_ 18, _56_ 1.

_58_ 12 _Ecrire ... simplement:_ 'just write to the lady.'

_58_ 18 _a mesure:_ 'as you go along', cf. note to _33_ 25.

_58_ 19 _que de bontes:_ lit. 'how many kindnesses!' transl. 'how good you
are!' Cf. note to _10_ 24.

_58_ 23 _Fort heureusement que:_ cf. note to _41_ 2.

_58_ 26 _Lamartine_ (Alphonse, 1790 1869) famous French poet, prose
writer, and statesman. His "Voyage en Orient" is the record of his travels
in 1832-1833.

_58_ 27 _Cantique des Cantiques:_ the 'Song of Songs,' or 'Song of
Solomon,' full of the Oriental phraseology of passion.

_58_ 28 _qu'il se put voir:_ (= _put se voir_) 'that could be seen,' 'that
ever was seen', cf. notes to _4_ 23 (_il_ impersonal), _5_ 23 (_se voir_,
reflexive with passive force).

_59_ 7 _Allons:_ plain imperative, not the exclamation cf. _58_ 6.

_59_ 15 _l'esperer:_ for this _le_ cf. note to _25_ 18.

_59_ 16 _du reste:_ 'besides.'

_59_ 29 _casse-tete a pointes:_ 'war club with spikes', cf. note to _2_
20.

_59_ 32 _le haut de la ville:_ = _la ville haute_ (_37_ 27).

_60_ 5 _cour interieure:_ Oriental houses are built in the form of a
hollow square, the house surrounding the courtyard on all sides.

_60_ 8 _plus forte:_ 'stouter.'

_60_ 9 _ne fit que traverser:_ 'did no more than pass through,' 'merely
passed through.'

_60_ 13 _sous les ramages ... fleurs:_ 'under the figures of her flowered
dress'--_laissant deviner:_ cf. note to _7_ 23.

_60_ 14 _friande a point:_ 'dainty to the point of perfection.'

_60_ 15 _ronde de partout:_ 'round all over'--_narghile:_ 'nargile,' a
Turkish pipe in which the smoke is drawn through water, a hookah.

_60_ 16 _toute:_ 'entirely.'

_60_ _chapter heading_ _Sidi:_ among the Mohammedans a title of respect,
when addressed to a foreigner, about equivalent to Mr--_ben:_ Arabic, 'son
of' 'Tartarin son of Tartarin.'

_60_ 24 _a la veillee:_ 'at the gossiping hour' _Veillee_ = a sitting up
at night for work or pleasure, especially to tell stories.

_60_ 28 _voici ... deja:_ 'already several years ago,' 'several years have
already passed since then.'

_60_ 29 _dame du cru:_ 'native girl', cf. note to _26_ 6.

_61_ 2 _n'est autre que:_ 'is no other than.'

_61_ 4 _Qu'est-ce que vous voulez:_ 'what can you expect?' lit. 'what do
you wish?' Cf. _75_ 18.

_61_ 7 _durant:_ cf. note to _53_ 5.

_61_ 9 _Annibal a Capoue:_ 'Hannibal at Capua.' After the battle of Cannae
(216 B.C.) in which the Roman army was overwhelmed, Hannibal, the
Carthaginian general, instead of following up his success, retired for the
winter into Capua, where his army was demoralized by the enervating
influences of the luxury loving city. Livy makes this to have been the
cause of Hannibal's failure--a view now generally discredited.

_61_ 15 _confitures au musc:_ 'preserves perfumed with musk.'

_61_ 19 _se faisait des mines:_ 'made grimaces to herself.'

_61_ 23 _avait tout le temps de:_ 'had plenty of time to.'

_62_ 2 _la ville europeenne:_ the part of the city inhabited by Europeans,
as distinguished from _la ville haute_ _37_ 27, the Moorish quarter.

_62_ 9 _on ne peut plus satisfait:_ 'perfectly satisfied', lit. 'one
cannot (be) more satisfied.'

_62_ 12 _il suffisait d'un regard:_ 'a glance was enough', cf. _il suffit
d'un kepi_ (_77_ 15) 'a military cap is enough.'

_62_ 14 _Circe._ 'Circe,' the enchantress, who by means of a potion
transformed the companions of Ulysses into swine (Odyssey x).

_62_ 21 _se trouvaient etre:_ 'proved to be', cf. note to _13_ 22.

_62_ 24 _tous:_ pronoun, for pronunciation cf. note to _20_ 13.

_62_ 26 _lui gagnaient son argent:_ 'won his money from him.'

_62_ 29 _le Prophete:_ Mohammed It is common in European literature to
represent Mohammedans as paying to Mohammed the same sort of worship as
Catholics pay to the highest saints. Cf. note to _83_ 8.

_62_ 31 _leur ... et:_ 'their white housetop which', lit. 'their terrace
 ... which acted as roof to the house and' _Terrasse_ is any artificial
level place for spending time outdoors, whether a terrace or a flat roof
such as characterizes Oriental architecture, cf. the less familiar
meanings of _terrace_ in English.

_63_ 1 _en s'echelonnant:_ 'in tiers', cf. _4_ 13.

_63_ 4 _s'egrenait ... ciel:_ 'was diffused gently note by note through
the sky.' _Egrener_ = 'to strip' grain from the head, grapes from the
bunch--_minaret:_ the tower of a mosque. See next note.

_63_ 5 _muezzin:_ an officer of a Mohammedan mosque who calls the faithful
to prayer by crying from the top of the minaret. Since the minaret is high
and from the top the muezzin has a view of the roofs of the houses where
the Mohammedan women spend a great deal of the time, blind men are sought
for this office--_decoupant ... dans:_ 'his white shadow standing out
against.'

_63_ 6 _chantant la gloire d'Allah:_ cf. note to _92_ 1.

_63_ 12 _une sainte Therese d'Orient:_ 'an oriental St Theresa' St-Theresa
(1515-1582) was one of Spain's greatest mystic poets.

_63_ _chapter heading_ _On ... Tarascon._ 'our Tarascon correspondent
writes us.'

_63_ 17 _Par:_ cf. note to _10_ 22.

_63_ 18 _tout seulet:_ 'in solitary ease' _Seulet_, fem _seulette_,
diminutive of _seul_ (cf. note to _33_ 27) The masculine is rarely used.

_63_ 19 _en spartene:_ 'of esparto cloth,' woven from esparto, a Spanish
grass much used in the manufacture of mats, baskets, hats, ropes, etc.

_63_ 20 _cedrats:_ 'cedrats,' an especially fragrant citron (not melon).

_63_ 21 _balin-balan:_ Provencal, 'swaying.'

_63_ 22 _s'en allait:_ cf. note to _17_ 4.

_63_ 27 _He! monstre de sort:_ cf. note to _1_ 12--_on dirait monsieur
Tartarin:_ transl. 'if that doesn't look like Mr Tartarin!'

_64_ 2 _sur la porte de._ = _sur la terrasse de_ transl. 'in front of.'
Tables are spread on the sidewalk in front of French restaurants and cafes
in fine weather.

_64_ 4 _He! adieu:_ cf. note to _13_ 7.

_64_ 6 _le voila parti a rire:_ 'he burst out laughing.'

_64_ 9 _Que:_ Provencal for _quel_.

_64_ 11 _Marco:_ a Provencal feminine noun, hence _o_ instead of _a_
Marca.

_64_ 15 _D'ou sortez-vous donc:_ 'where under the sun do you come from?'
(that you are so credulous).

_64_ 18 _qui s'allongeait:_ cf. note to _55_ 7.

_64_ 20 _Mettons:_ 'let's say.'

_64_ 21 _voyez-vous:_ 'see here.'

_64_ 24 _sa moue:_ cf. _3_ 11-14, _39_ 10.

_64_ 27 _faire dire:_ cf. note to _7_ 25--_au pays:_ 'at home' _Pays_ =
native 'country,' 'province,' or 'district.' _La France_ (_la Provence,
Tarascon_) _est mon pays._ Cf. note to _1_ 16.

_64_ 28 _collegue:_ = Provencal _coulego_ 'colleague,' 'comrade.'

_64_ 30 _quelques pipes:_ 'a few pipefuls'--_vous fera du bien:_ 'will do
you good', contrast _ferez bien_ without _du_, line 22.

_65_ 4 _jurons du cru:_ 'oaths of his native land', cf. note to _26_ 6.

_65_ 5 _la-has:_ 'over there' in Provence.

_65_ 11 _lui sauta aux yeux:_ cf. note to _12_ 25.

_65_ 14 _n'a ... depuis:_ 'has not been heard from for', lit. 'has not
given of his news since.'

_65_ 15 _Qu'est devenu:_ 'what has become of?' lit. 'what has become?' Cf.
note to _93_ 7.

_65_ 23 _Tombouctou:_ 'Timbuktu,' the most famous city of central Africa,
a French possession since 1893, in Tartarin's time only three Europeans
had ever reached it, and one of these was killed two days after he left
the city.

_65_ 24 _garde:_ subjunctive.

_66_ 6 _Le temps d'inspecter ... et l'intrepide:_ transl. 'only a moment
to inspect ... and the bold.'

_66_ 7 _ecrire deux mots:_ = _ecrire un mot_ 'to write a line.'

_66_ 10 _la route de Blidah:_ 'the Blidah road.' Blidah is a city about
twenty five miles southwest of Algiers. On _de_ cf. note to _1_ 5.

_66_ 12 _babouches:_ Turkish slippers, made of colored leather, without
heels--_defroque:_ 'cast offs', properly, the possessions which a monk
leaves behind at his death, then, by extension, what is abandoned
disdainfully.

_66_ 13 _trefles:_ 'trefoils,' an ornamental foliation consisting of three
divisions, or foils (architectural term).

_67_ 2 _gros bleu:_ = _bleu fonce_, 'dark blue.'

_67_ 4 _moxas:_ 'blisters.' The word _moxa_ (originally Japanese) in
English or French means a wad of cottony substance laid on any part of the
body and set on fire for the purpose of counter irritation, its use is now
out of date. In French the word may also mean the burn thus produced on
the skin.

_67_ 5 _rotonde:_ properly, 'rotunda,' a round building surmounted by a
cupola; then, also, the 'back compartment' of a stage coach.

_67_ 1 _dut se contenter de:_ 'had to content himself with'; cf. _80_ 14,
_88_ 14. See note to _2_ 10.

_67_ 10 _Il y avait de tout un peu:_ = _il y avait un peu de tout. Il y
avait de tout_ has about the same meaning--_trappiste:_ 'Trappist' (monk).
The abbey of La Trappe, from which this austere order takes its name, was
founded in 1140 in the department of the Orne (northwestern France).

_67_ 12 _Orleansville:_ a city on the Sheliff, a hundred and thirty miles
southwest of Algiers.--_si charmante ... que fut la compagnie:_ 'however
charming the company was.' Cf. note to _4_ 6.

_67_ 13 _n'etait pas en train de:_ 'was not in the mood for.' Cf. _je ne
suis pas en train de travailler_ 'I don't feel like working,' _je suis en
train de travailler_ (cf. _18_ 4) 'I am (busy) working.'

_67_ 15 _brassiere:_ the 'arm-strap' of the carriage; more commonly, the
strap by which a knapsack or similar article is held.

_68_ 8 _les flancs ... qui se plaignaient:_ cf. note to _55_ 1.

_68_ 10 _vieille fee:_ read "Les Fees de France" in "Contes du lundi."

_68_ 18 _Joncquieres_ (usually spelled _Jonquieres_), _Bellegarde:_ small
towns across the river from Tarascon, on the road to Nimes.

_68_ 19 _remis:_ more colloquial than reconnu.

_68_ 20 _du corps que vous avez pris:_ 'of the flesh you have taken on.'

_68_ 21 _coquin de bon sort:_ cf. note to _1_ 12.

_68_ 24 _Mais enfin:_ 'But, tell me.'

_68_ 27 _gre:_ a noun, 'liking,' used almost exclusively in prepositional
phrases (_de bon gre_ 'willingly,' _a son gre_ 'to his liking,' and the
like; cf. _malgre_) and in _savoir gre a quelqu'un_ 'to be grateful to a
person': _je lui sais gre de m'avoir aide._ Latin _gratum_ 'that which is
pleasing.'

_68_ 31 _reactionnaires:_ 'reactionary.' This word means little to an
American, but France has constantly been talking, more or less seriously,
of reactions to previously existing states of affairs, as from republic to
monarchy.

_68_ 32 _a mener:_ cf. _a lire_ _10_ 22--_une vie de galere:_ 'the life of
(such as one leads on) a galley,' 'a galley-slave's life', cf. note to _1_
5.

_68_ 33 _chemins de fer algeriens:_ there were no railroads in Algeria
when Daudet visited it in 1861, but between this year and 1872, when
"Tartarin" appeared, several hundred miles of tracks had been constructed.

_69_ 2 _que je le regrette:_ 'how I long for it.' _Regretter_ = 'to
regret,' 'to regret the loss or the absence of' a thing, hence 'to long
for' a thing. For the anticipatory _le_ cf. note to 32 5.

_69_ 4 _il fallait me voir:_ cf. note to _24_ 3.

_69_ 5 _vernissees a neuf:_ 'varnished so that they shone like new.'

_69_ 8 _sur l'air de:_ 'to the tune of.'--_Lagadigadeou_ (pronounce
_deou_): the refrain of Desanat's version of Tarascon's most popular song
may be translated as follows: _Lagadigadeou, la Tarasque--La Tarasque du
Chateau--Un air de lagadeou--Qui resonne_ (resounds) _a tout rompre_ (cf.
note to _2_ 2) _avec son tapage._ Notre-Dame du Chateau is a place of
pilgrimage near Tarascon. _Lagadigadeou_ is meanmgless. For the _Tarasque_
cf. note to _3_ 25. For this song as a Provencal carter's song, see
F. Gras, "The Terror," ch xxxiii.

_69_ 9 _que:_ cf. note to _5_ 1.

_69_ 10 _jetant d'un tour de bras:_ 'throwing with a swing'; of _a tour de
bras_ 'with all one's might'; cf. note to _51_ 20.

_69_ 12 _allume:_ exclamation serving to encourage horses: 'quick, now!'

_69_ 15 _detaler:_ the opposite of _etaler_ (cf. note to _37_ 22), = 'to
bring in goods exposed for sale,' 'to shut up shop,' and figuratively, in
familiar discourse, 'to dash away,' 'scurry along'; cf. _94_ 13.--_grande
route royale:_ 'king's highway.'

_69_ 17 _bornes kilometriques:_ 'milestones' or rather 'kilometer-stones.'
--_ses petits tas ... espaces:_ 'its little heaps of stones at regular
intervals'; broken stone for repairing the road.

_69_ 21 _maires:_ 'mayors,' presiding officers of communes (cf. note to
_17_ 14).

_69_ 22 _prefet ... eveque:_ Nimes is the chief city of the department
(cf. note to _17_ 14) of the Gard, and therefore the seat of the prefect.
It is also the seat of a bishop.

_69_ 23 _mazet:_ Provencal diminutive of _mas_; = 'little country house.'
--_collegiens:_ 'schoolboys.' The French _college_ (also the _lycee_)
carries students from the beginning of their studies through a course
which corresponds roughly to that completed in the second year of the
American college.

_69_ 24 _tout frais rases du matin:_ 'all (adverb, = _quite_) freshly
shaved that morning.'

_69_ 25 _vous ... casquettes:_ transl. 'all of you gentlemen, the
caphunters.'

_69_ 27 _la votre:_ i.e. _votre romance_, cf. pages 6-7.

_69_ 30 _Bedouins:_ nomadic Arabs in northern Africa and Arabia.

_69_ 32 _tout cela:_ cf. note to _55_ 28.

_69_ 33 _auquel ... rien:_ cf. _je ne comprends rien a tout cela_ 'I don't
understand any of that.'

_70_ 1 _On me plaint:_ 'they begrudge me.'

_70_ 5 _brancards:_ a stage-coach has no _shafts. Brancards_ is used also
for the two pieces of wood which connect the fore and after carriages of a
vehicle, transl. 'body.' Daudet may mean simply 'pole.'

_70_ 6 _tenez!_ lit. 'hold!' An exclamation whose force varies greatly;
transl. here 'just see that!'

_70_ 8 _gouvernement:_ 'seat of government', cf. note to _42_ 1.

_70_ 9 _plus rien:_ cf. note to _13_ 1.

_70_ 10 _lentisques:_ 'mastic trees,' small trees growing in the
Mediterranean countries, producing a resin which is used in the
manufacture of paints.

_70_ 14 _champoreau:_ a warm drink, coffee with a copious admixture of
brandy, popular among the Europeans in Africa.

_70_ 21 _une cour de caravanserail:_ cf. note to _1_ 5. A caravansary is a
building for the lodging of caravans. See "Le Caravanserail" in "Contes du
lundi."

_70_ 29 _kousskouss:_ (_couscous_): meat cooked with flour, the national
dish of the Arabs according to Daudet, "Paysages gastronomiques" in
"Contes du lundi."

_71_ 2 _une place de jolie sous-prefecture:_ 'the square of a pretty
little city,' 'the square of a pretty city about the size of a
subprefecture'; cf. note to _17_ 14. For the construction cf. note to _1_
5.

_71_ 4 _de petits soldats de plomb:_ 'little lead soldiers', cf. note to
_1_ 5. The men drilling looked like lead soldiers when seen through the
_vitres depolies par la buee_, on account of their stiffness and the
dimness of their outline in the early morning light.

_71_ 7 _ne sentait pas encore le lion:_ 'did not savor of lions yet', cf.
_cela sent le camphre_ 'that smells of camphor.'

_71_ 8 _Plus au sud:_ not negative; cf. note to _13_ 1.

_71_ 13 _grosse comme le poing:_ 'as big as your fist.'

_71_ 14 _haute de cinq doigts:_ cf. notes to _26_ 5 and _42_ 23.
--_serviette:_ a kind of 'portfolio' widely used in France by public
officials, professors, and others, for carrying papers and books.

_71_ 15 _notaire:_ the position of the French notaire is more dignified
than that of our 'notary', he performs some of the functions of the
American lawyer.

_71_ 20 _regardait toujours Tartarin:_ cf. note to _11_ 12.

_71_ 21 _prit la mouche:_ transl. 'took offense.' _Prendre la mouche_ =
'to seize the fly,' 'to seize a slight occasion for becoming angry,' 'to
become vexed easily.'

_71_ 26 _leur gaine:_ cf. note to _29_ 11.

_72_ 17 _Et toute la diligence de rire:_ 'and the whole stage coach
laughed', cf. the Latin historical infinitive, used in place of the
perfect. In French this infinitive is always preceded by _de_ and the
clause is almost always introduced by _et, la dessus_, or a similar word.
--_trois cheveux de Cadet-Roussel:_ the popular song called
_Cadet-Roussel_, 'Young Roussel,' was composed on the basis of a local
song by a soldier in the Northern Army of the revolutionary forces about
1792. Cadet Roussel has three houses, three coats, three hats, three hairs
(two for his face, one for his wig, and when he goes to see his lady he
gathers the three into a braid), three dogs, and so on.

_72_ 21 _Terrible profession que la votre:_ understand (_c'est une_)
_terrible profession que la votre_ (_est_); cf. note to _21_ 19.

_72_ 23 _Bombonnel_ (d. 1890): undertook to free North Africa of panthers.

_72_ 27 _Te! ... connais:_ 'what! know him? I should say so!' For _te_ cf.
note to _13_ 7. _Pardi_ is a euphemism (really a dialectal form) for
_pardieu_; cf. _parbleu_, _47_ 6.

_73_ 3 _Tout juste!_ 'exactly!' cf. note to _83_ 5.

_73_ 15 _ce qu'il en est:_ 'how matters stand.' On _en_ cf. note to _8_
19.

_73_ 20 _Chassaing_ (Jacques, 1821-1871): hunter of lions and panthers.

_73_ 24 _qu'est-ce que c'est donc que ... ?_ 'what, pray, is ... ?'
disdainful; cf. _55_ 28.

_73_ 27 _Milianah:_ a city in the Zakkar mountains, about seventy-five
miles southwest of Algiers. A comparison of the story of Tartarin's
adventures at Milianah with the pages on that city in "Lettres de mon
moulin" will show how many details have been borrowed from the notes
Daudet took down during his stay in Algeria.

_73_ 30 _a regarder ... s'il:_ 'looking (to see) if', cf. note to _10_ 22.

_74_ 4 _loyal:_ 'honest.'

_74_ 11 _A quoi bon ... ?_ 'what (was) the good of ... ?' Latin _cui
bono?_

_74_ 16 _train de derriere:_ 'hind quarters,' _train de devant_ = 'fore
quarters,' of an animal; properly applied only to an animal harnessed to a
vehicle.

_74_ 17 _Qu'est-ce ... plus?_ colloquial construction; transl. 'what under
the sun (_donc_) did they mean by telling me there were none left?'

_74_ 26 _promenaient:_ note the active use of this verb, cf. _monter_ _41_
28.

_74_ 27 _Savoyard ... marmotte:_ the 'marmot' is a rodent inhabiting the
Alps, related to the American woodchuck and prairie dog. Savoyards
traveling through France with marmots remind one of our Italian
organ-grinders with their monkeys. Cf. note to _1_ 8.

_74_ 28 _Le sang ... tour:_ 'the Tarasconian's blood boiled', lit. 'made
only one turn.'

_75_ 2 _Au zouge de paix:_ '(take him) to the justice of the peace' (_juge
de paix_).

_75_ 3 _nuit:_ he was blind.

_75_ 12 _Sitot votre lettre recue:_ 'as soon as I received your letter,' =
_aussitot que votre lettre fut recue._

_75_ 14 _ventre a terre:_ 'at full speed'; so fast that the horses' bodies
(almost) touched the ground.

_75_ 16 _donc:_ render by emphasis on auxiliary: 'what _have_ you done?'

_75_ 18 _Que voulez-vous?_ cf. note to _61_ 4.--_De voir:_ cf. note to
_31_ 20.

_76_ 3 _Ce qui me va:_ 'what suits (pleases) me', cf. _ca vous va-t-il?_
(_91_ 3) 'does that suit you?'--_en matiere de conclusion_ = _en maniere
de conclusion_ 'to bring the affair to a conclusion,' 'by way of
conclusion.'

_76_ 4 n'en deplaise a mons Bombonnel: 'may it not displease Mr.
Bombonnel,' 'with Mr Bombonnel's leave.' _Mons_ (the _o_ is nasalized and
the _s_ is pronounced) is used contemptuously for _Monsieur_.

_76_ 7 _battre la plaine:_ 'beat the plain' (to rouse game); cf. note to
_10_ 5--_Cheliff:_ most important river in Algeria, over 370 miles long.

_76_ 8 _Auriez-vous:_ cf. note to _15_ _chapter heading._

_76_ 24 _tuyas:_ any trees closely related to the arbor-vitae or American
white cedar, here 'sandarac trees.'--_caroubiers:_ cf. note to _33_ 19.

_76_ 27 _Liban:_ 'Lebanon,' in Syria, formerly famous for its cedar
forests with their far-reaching odors and its many streams, see the Song
of Solomon, iv, 8, 11, 15.

_77_ 1 _brodees au fil d'argent:_ 'embroidered with silver thread.'

_77_ 2 _un faux air de:_ cf. note to _56_ 27.

_77_ 12 _tout son monde:_ 'all its servants'; cf. note to _54_ 7.

_77_ 14 _pas n'est besoin:_ for _il n'est pas besoin_ 'there is no need.'

_77_ 15 _Il suffit d'un kepi:_ cf. note to _62_ 12.

_77_ 17 _la toque de Gessler:_ 'Gessler's cap.' Gessler is the Austrian
governor of Swltzerland who figures in the story of William Tell. The
Swiss were forced to salute his cap, which was placed on a pole.

_77_ 18 _allait son train:_ 'went on its way.' _Train_ = 'gait.'

_77_ 23 _bureau arabe:_ 'Arab office,' the French bureau for the
Administration of affairs concerning the natives.--_au bon frais:_
strengthened form of _au frais_ 'in the fresh air.'

_77_ 25 _crut a un coup de main:_ 'thought it was an uprising'; cf. _94_
27. _Coup de main_ = 'surprise,' 'sudden attack.'--_fit baisser:_ cf. note
to _7_ 25.

_77_ 26 _mit ... en etat de siege:_ 'proclaimed martial law in the city.'

_78_ 2 _se sauva ... jambes:_ 'ran away into the Zakkar as fast as he
could.' For the Zakkar (a part of the Little Atlas) see note to _73_ 27.

_78_ 4 _ombre trouee:_ 'broken shade'; the light found its way in places
through the foliage of the tree.

_78_ 8 _precisement:_ 'quite opportunely', cf. note to _83_ 5.

_78_ 15 _Comment voulez-vous ... ?_ 'how do you suppose ... ?'

_78_ 18 _Si maigre ... paraisse:_ cf. note to _4_ 6.

_78_ 21 _Demandez plutot:_ cf. _44_ 1.

_78_ 23 _mouci:_ for _monsieur._

_78_ 31 _coup d'oeil:_ 'looks'; cf. note to _54_ 12.--_ne feraient pas
tres bien:_ 'would not do very well.'

_79_ 1 _Tant que vous en voudrez:_ 'as many as you like', note the future.

_79_ 3 _a quelques kilometres:_ cf. note to _18_ 25.

_79_ 11 _pendus a:_ 'hanging from.'

_79_ 15 _une mesure a ble:_ 'a wheat measure', _une mesure de ble_ 'a
measure (full) of wheat.' Cf. _2_ 6.--_des Kabyles qui s'eventrent
autour:_ 'Kabyles slashing each other with knives (lit. cutting each other
open) around it'; cf. notes to _55_ 7 (_qui_), _7_ 2 (_se_), _1_ 6
(_autour_).

_79_ 16 _une joie:_ = _une joie!_ ...; cf. _un Teur!_ ... _32_ 4, and note
to _15_ 21.

_79_ 17 _se noyer:_ 'get drowned,' not 'drown himself.'

_79_ 20 _Par exemple:_ 'as luck would have it'; cf. note to _11_ 24.

_79_ 23 _tete de bedouin:_ 'Bedouin-like head'; cf. note to _1_ 5. This is
a good example of Daudet's skill in finding striking simularities: the
Bedouin (cf. note to _69_ 30) has a long, narrow head.

_79_ 27 _Toujours la folie orientale!_ 'his craze about things oriental
was still with him!'

_79_ 30 _tout en haut_ = _tout a fait en haut_, cf. note to _47_ 11.

_80_ 1 _jambes a noeuds:_ 'knotty legs.'

_80_ 8 _etoupe:_ aptly characterizes the hair of a camel's hump.

_80_ 10 _Va te promener!_ cf. note to _48_ 11.

_80_ 13 _six cent mille dents:_ each Arab had 150 teeth! Which goes to
show that Daudet himself was born not far from Tarascon. But it is to be
remembered that _six cent mille_ is sometimes used merely to indicate a
very large number, like English "thousands of."

_80_ 14 _dut:_ cf. note to _67_ 7.

_80_ 19 _devant:_ _devant_ for _avant, auparavant,_ is obsolete except in
certain locutions such as _comme devant._

_80_ 25 _douar:_ 'douar,' an Arab village, composed of tents arranged with
more or less regularity.--_plaine du Cheliff:_ the broad part of the
Sheliff basin is in the half desert plateau between the Great Atlas and
the Little Atlas. The picture which follows is interesting, it is
overdrawn, however, since Algeria never was, and certainly is not today,
as bad as Daudet paints it.

_80_ 27 _se compliquent d':_ 'are complicated by (the addition of).'

_80_ 28 _Zouzou:_ military slang for _zouave._

_81_ 1 _le sergent La Ramee, le brigadier Pitou:_ popular names for the
French soldier, the English "Tommy Atkins."

_81_ 3 _su:_ 'known how,' 'been able.'

_81_ 5 _bachagas:_ 'bashagas' (Turkish for 'head agas' or 'heads of agas,'
cf. note to _82_ 5), native chiefs of districts.--_se mouchent ... Legion
d'honneur:_ 'gravely use their insignia of the Legion of Honor as
handkerchiefs.' Like much in "Tartarin de Tarascon," this detail was
extracted from the memorandum books which Daudet carried during his
Algerian travels, again in "Un Decore du 15 aout" ("Contes du lundi") he
declares that he repeatedly saw the _grand cordon_ used for the purpose
here mentioned. The Legion of Honor was established by Napoleon (then
first consul) in 1802. The insignia are a wide red ribbon from which is
suspended a five-pointed cross.

_81_ 7 _font batonner:_ cf. note to _7_ 25.

_81_ 8 _cadis:_ 'cadis,' judges under Mohammedan law.

_81_ 9 _tartufes du Coran et de la loi:_ 'hypocritical respecters of
Religion and Law.' _Tartufe_ is the hypocrite in Moliere's play of that
name, the word is now used as a common noun to designate a person who
pretends to be devout. The Coran (Koran) is the Holy Book of the
Mohammedans, containing the revelations of Mohammed.--_quinze aout:_
'August 15,' Napoleon's birthday, now superseded by July 14, the national
holiday, as the day on which the decorations of the Legion of Honor are
distributed. Read "Un Decore du quinze aout," referred to in note to _81_
5

_81_ 12 _kousskouss au sucre_: 'sweetened couscous'--_caids_ 'caids,'
Mohammedan military chiefs.

_81_ 13 _un general Yusuf quelconque_81_. 'some General Yusuf or other'
Joseph Vantini (1810-1866), of Italian birth, was a French officer who
played an active part in the conquest of Algeria _Yusuf_ (in French
spelling, _Yousouf_) is the Arabic form of the name Joseph.

_81_ 19 _maquis_: ordinarily used only of the Corsican 'maquis', extensive
areas overgrown with an almost impenetrable tangle of brushwood
--_le grenier de la France_: the words of the enthusiastic promoters of
Algerian colonization  Algeria's famous grain producing region does not
extend farther inland than one hundred miles, and does not include the
part which Tartarin was now traversing.

_81_ 25 _sauterelles enragees_ cf. note to _24_ 23.--_mangent jusqu'aux
rideaux_ 'eat the very curtains', cf._85_ 17.

_81_ 26 _en train de boire_ 'drinking', cf. note to _18_ 4.

_81_ 30 _tout entier a_ 'engrossed in'.

_81_ 31 _allait droit devant lui_ 'went straight ahead'.

_82_ 3 _dans les tribus_: 'in the (camps of the) tribes'.

_82_ 5 _agas_: 'agas' The _aga_ was formerly a great military chief in

Turkey, now the title is merely one of respect given to village magnates.

_82_ 6 _narghiles etc_  i.e. articles of the Orient and of the Occident.

_82_ 1 _Smyrne_: 'Smyrna,' important seaport in Asiatic Turkey, on the
Aegean Sea, famous for its rugs and silks--_lampes-moderateur_  more
precisely _lampes a moderateur_, 'moderator lamps' A moderator is an
instrument for governing the movement of machines, here, "a mechanical
contrivance by which the passage of the oil from the reservoir to the
burner is regulated or moderated to a uniform flow" (Oxford Dict).

_82_ 8 _sequins_: 'sequins,' an old gold coin of variable value, usually
worth about $2 25, formerly issued by the Venetian republic (_zecchino_)
and largely used in the Levant.

_82_ 9 _pendules a sujets, style Louis-Philippe_ 'clocks adorned with
figures in the Louis Philippe style' Louis Philippe was king of France
from 1830 to 1848.

_82_ 10 _diffas_: 'diffas,' among the Arabs of Africa receptions and
feasts offered to men of rank The fantasia is an Arab equestrian
Exhibition.

_82_ 11 _goums_ 'goums,' armed contingents supplied by Algerian tribes
for the French army, and commanded by French officers.

_82_ 15 _Pont-Neuf:_ this 'New Bridge' is the oldest of the many which
span the Seine in Paris. It was completed in 1604 by Henry IV, and
figures in many legends of old Paris. _C'est vieux comme le Pont-Neuf_
has become a proverb.

_82_ 20 _faisant frrt!_ 'saying sst! (scat!).'

_82_ 23 _vers les six heures:_ = _vers six heures._ Cf. note to _23_ 16.

_83_ 3 _Plus de doute:_ cf. note to _13_ 1.

_83_ 5 _tout juste:_ = _precisement_ _78_ 8, cf. _73_ 3.

_83_ 8 _ex-voto:_ (sing. and pl. alike), 'ex-votos,' 'votive offerings';
an offering made in fulfillment of a vow. Latin _ex voto_; cf. Horace,
_Odes_, _I_, v. The worship of saints in Mohammedan countries (where it
ranks as a superstition rather than as orthodox religion) is mainly
confined to the saint's tomb, or reputed tomb.

_83_ 12 _s'y refusa:_ = _se refusa a cela_ (cf. note to _2_ 29); 'refused
to consent.'--_tenait a:_ 'insisted upon.' _Tenir a faire quelque chose_ =
'to desire strongly to do a thing,' 'to be determined to do a thing';
_tenir a quelque chose_ = 'to care greatly for a thing.'

_83_ 16 _Ceci fait:_ 'this done.'

_83_ 31 _pas de velours:_ 'velvet steps,' 'soft steps.'

_84_ 1 _qu'on egorge:_ 'having their throats cut.'

_84_ 3 _Tartarin l'etait:_ 'Tartarin was' (it, that is, _emu_); cf. note
to _chose_ = 'to _25_ 18.

_84_ 7 _en train:_ cf. note to _67_ 13.

_84_ 9 _encore:_ cf. note to _18_ 31.

_84_ 10 _tint bon:_ 'held his ground'; cf. note to _27_ 16.

_84_ 14 _se replie ... marabout:_ 'retreats as fast as he can to the
marabout.' For _a toutes jambes_ cf. _78_ 2.

_84_ 17 _hydres:_ the Hydra of classical mythology was a water serpent
with many heads, each of which, when cut off, was replaced immediately by
two new ones.

_64_ 18 _A moi:_ 'help!'

_84_ 23 _filer:_ here, 'scamper off.' _Filer_ = 'to spin' (yarn), 'to
uncoil,' and colloquially 'to take to one's heels,' 'to race'; cf. _88_
27, _94_ 9.

_85_ 2 _au petit jour:_ 'at early dawn'; _au grand jour_ 'in full
daylight.'--qu'il: cf. note to _5_ 1.

_85_ 6 _chameau a bosse simple:_ 'one-humped camel,' dromadaire _93_ 6.

_85_ 9 _le Christ:_ pronounced [krist]; always with the article (the
Anointed).

_85_ 10 _Gethsemani:_ in the words _douta, pleurer_, Daudet refers to
Christ's moral and physical recoil at Gethsemane. A Frenchman is not
offended as we are by the flippancy of this reference to one of the
supreme moments of Christ's life. Cf. De Vigny's "Le Mont des Oliviers."

_85_ 13 _d'en face:_ 'in front of him'; cf. _90_ 20.

_85_ 17 _jusqu'aux pantoufles:_ made 'even the slippers' shake; of _81_
25.

_85_ 19 _Seul:_ while all trembled, Tartarin 'alone' did not.

_86_ 1 _Mahom:_ the most usual form of the name 'Mohammed' during the
Middle Ages; retained, for effect, in the oath _par Mahom._--l'echappa
belle: 'had a narrow escape'; cf. note to _8_ 18.

_86_ 3 _si ... n'avait envoye:_ note the omission of _pas_ after the
conjunction _si_; cf. note to _36_ 16.

_86_ 7 _l'homme a la plaque:_ 'the man with the badge,' the rural
policeman.

_86_ 14 processive: (of _proces,_ 'lawsuit'), 'litigious.'--_avocassiere:_
'pettifogging'; _avocat_ = 'lawyer,' _avocasser_ = 'to practice law'
(always in a depreciatory sense, cf. _bonasse_ _3_ 13).

_86_ 15 _la judiciaire ... se tripote:_ 'the dubious (lit. 'squinting')
judicial system which is cooked up', cf. note to _5_ 23.

_86_ 16 _la boheme des gens de loi:_ 'the legal Bohemia.' Gypsies were
supposed to have come from Bohemia; consequently any persons who lead an
irregular life are called Bohemians. Thus, for example, the Latin Quarter
of Paris, inhabited largely by artists and students, is called the
"Bohemian Quarter."

_86_ 18 _sauterelles:_ cf. note to _24_ 23.

_86_ 19 _papier timbre:_ 'stamped paper.' A government revenue stamp,
either printed on the paper (_papier timbre_) or affixed, must accompany
French legal and commercial documents. _Timbre-poste_, masculine, =
'postage stamp.'

_86_ 20 _tiges de ses bottes:_ the locusts, _sauterelles_ (_1_ 18), eat a
Plant jusqu'a la tige; Daudet is punning here on the two meanings of
_tige,_ 'stalk' of a plant, 'leg' of a boot.--_dechiquete ... mais:_
'stripped like a stalk of corn,' of whose foliage the locusts leave
nothing but midribs and hanging fibers.

_86_ 27 _silo:_ a pit for storing grain. Since Goffart's work on the
ensilage of green crops, published in 1877, the word has become familiar
in America, our silo for green crops being usually above ground. As a
punishment in the French army in Algeria, men (sometimes more of them than
could lie down on the bottom of the pit) were put into a pit and kept
there while filth accumulated around them.

_87_ 2 _sans_ (_compter_) _les frais:_ 'plus the costs.'

_87_ 3 _piastres:_ 'dollars,' the Spanish coin also called _douro_ (note
to _48_ 21); Frenchmen in America sometimes call the American dollar a
_piastre_, _piastre_ also means the Turkish piaster (4.4 American cents).

_87_ 5 _judiciaires:_ 'judiciary'; i.e., offered to the judges.

_87_ 7 _au detail:_ 'piecemeal'; cf. _vendre en_ (_au_) _detail_ 'to sell
at retail'; _en gros_ 'wholesale.'

_87_ 10 _y passerent:_ 'went by the same road'; i.e., were sold.

_87_ 12 _cochinchinoises:_ 'from Cochin China,' a part of Indo-China, at
the south of the Siam peninsula, a French colony since its conquest in
1859-1867.

_87_ 16 _ce qu'il advint de:_ 'what became of.' _Advenir_ is used only
impersonally.

_87_ 19 _payer la diligence:_ 'pay for (his place in) the stage coach.'

_87_ 20 _encore:_ 'after all.'

_87_ 21 _d'un placement difficile:_ 'hard to dispose of.'

_87_ 25 _sur:_ the definitive edition also prints _sur_ here; _sous_ would
seem to be the correct reading, cf. _66_ 13. It is possible that the
reference here is to figures worked into the pavement.

_87_ 28 _par_ (oftener a) _petites journees:_ 'by short stages.' _Journee_
=  a day's march,' the original meaning of Engl. _journey._

_87_ 30 _s'etait ... inexplicable:_ 'had conceived an inexplicable fancy
for his master.' _Se prendre d'amitie pour quelqu'un_ = 'to take a liking;
to a person.'

_87_ 32 _ne ... semelle:_ 'never more than a foot behind him,' lit. 'not
leaving him by (the length of) the sole of a shoe.' For _de_ cf. note to
_42_ 25.

_88_ 2 _a toute epreuve_ = _a l'epreuve de tout_ 'proof against anything.'

_88_ 3 _d'autant que_ (for _d'autant plus que_): 'so much the more that,'
'especially because.'--_rien:_ 'nothing '; cf. note to _13_ 1. _Il ne se
nourrissait avec rien_ would mean 'he did not nourish himself with
anything,' the introduction of _ne_ bringing the negation to bear upon the
verb.

_88_ 7 _il lui en voulut de:_ cf. note to _36_ 10.

_88_ 8 _oie bridee:_ 'bridled goose' and figuratively 'ninny.' A feather
is sometimes passed through the nostrils of a goose or a gosling (_oison
bride_) to prevent it from escaping through hedges. The ridiculous
appearance which the fowl presents gives use to the figurative meaning.
Cf. Rabelais's judge _Bridoie_ and Beaumarchais's _Brid'oison._
--le prit en grippe:_ 'took a dislike to him'; _grippe_ formerly meant
'whim,' 'fancy.'

_88_ 16 _huit grands jours:_ 'a whole week.' _Huit jours_ = 'a week,'
_quinze jours_ = 'a fortnight.'

_88_ 20 _biskris:_ 'Biskran porters.' Biskra is a city in Algeria, at the
edge of the Sahara. Many Biskrans settle in the coast cities, especially
Algiers, where they obtain employment as porters; hence, _biskri_ =
'porter.' The Arabic suffix _-i_ corresponds to the English _-an_ or
_-ite._

_88_ 22 _la patience lui echappa:_ 'he lost all patience'; cf. note to _4_
24.

_89_ 2 _Le jour tombait:_ we say 'night was falling'; cf. _la nuit
tombait_.

_44_ 16, and _a la tombee de la nuit_ _53_ 11.

_89_ 4 _des bruits de verres:_ 'clinking of glasses.'

_89_ 6 _qui chantait:_ 'singing'; cf. note to _55_ 7.

_89_ 9 _Tron de Diou:_ = _tonnerre de Dieu_ (cf. note to _38_ 31), a
strong oath; 'by the thunder of heaven!'

_89_ 13 _tambourins:_ 'drums.' The Provencal and Algerian tambourin is a
drum higher than it is wide. _Tambour_ _90_ 1 = _tambourin._ Cf. note to
_53_ 15.

_89_ 29 _Digo-li ... moun bon!_ = _dis-lui qu'il vienne, mon bon;_ 'just
tell him to come on, old fellow'; a Provencal challenge.

_89_ 30 _du premier_ (scil. _etage_): 'of the second floor.' The first
floor of a French house is called the _rez-de-chaussee._

_90_ 2 _marseillais:_ 'dialect of Marseilles.' Not only did she know
French, but even Tartarin's own dialect. The Provencal language comprises
many dialects; that of Tarascon does not differ greatly from that of
Marseilles.

_90_ 3 _Quand je vous disais:_ 'what did I tell you about ...?'

_90_ 9 _s'est ... sac:_ 'let himself be caught red-handed'; cf. note to
_7_ 25.

_90_ 11 _a l'ombre:_ 'in prison' (lit. 'in the shade'), slang.--_maison
centrale:_ prison to which prisoners who have been condemned to more than
one year of detention are sent; transl. 'jail.'

_90_ 12 _tenez!_ 'hold!' 'let me see!' Cf. note to _70_ 6.

_90_ 14 _C'est donc ca:_ colloquial for _c'est donc pour ca,_ 'that's
why.'--_ne ... ville:_ cf. _57_ 1-6.

_90_ 17 _sans quoi:_ 'otherwise,' lit. 'without which.'

_90_ 18 _votre histoire avec le muezzin:_ cf. the passage beginning _63_
3.

_90_ 20 _d'en face:_ 'over there,' 'across the way'; cf. note to _85_ 13.

_90_ 23 _faisait des declarations_ (_d'amour_): 'made love declarations.'

_90_ 26 _c'est:_ cf. note to 44 7.

_90_ 28 _eut ... philosophe:_ 'made the gesture of a philosopher' (cf.
note to _1_ 5); shrugged his shoulders.

_90_ 29 _si vous m'en croyez:_ 'if you'll take my advice.' _En_ is
redundant, cf. note to _8_ 19.

_91_ 1 _Qu'a cela ne tienne!_ 'that makes no difference!'

_91_ 3 _ca vous va-t-il:_ cf. note to _76_ 3.

_91_ 5 _croustade:_ a sort of 'pie' with a very crisp crust--_sans
Rancune_ lit. 'without rancor', transl. 'forget your ill will.'

_91_ 10 _fort avant dans:_ 'far on into.'

_91_ 11 _trois heures du matin:_ the regular hours for the muezzin's call
are daylight hours, but two calls in the night are also made for the
benefit of such pious persons as may be awake.

_91_ 12 _accompagner:_ i.e. to his lodging.

_91_ 14 _vengeance:_ Tartarin's vengeance is a delightful bit of humor.

_91_ 16 _monta encore:_ 'ascended still higher.'

_91_ 21 _Mostaganem:_ a city on the Mediterranean, west of Algiers.

_91_ 25 _cure:_ it is amusing to hear Tartarin apply the title of the
respected French parish priest to the rascally muezzin. At home Tartarin
would address the priest as _monsieur le cure._

_92_ 1 _La Allah il Allah:_ French transliteration of the Arabic words
with which the Mohammedan confession of faith, 'There is no god but God,
and Mohammed is God's messenger,' begins. Both parts of this confession of
faith, especially the first part, are repeated more than once in the
muezzin's regular call. The first part is misquoted in various forms, as
here, by Europeans who have been confused by the series of sounds. Note
that Tartarin not only echoes the sound of this part, but parodies its
sense in lines 3-4--_farceur:_ 'fraud.'

_92_ 3 _viedaze:_ a Provencal word, used of persons, = 'a good for
nothing,' of things, = 'a trifle.' Here 'isn't worth a straw.'

_92_ 4 _carotteurs:_ 'pikers' _Jouer la carotte_ = to stake little (e.g. a
carrot) in a game. _Tirer la carotte a quelqu'un_ = to get a small sum out
of a person by making him believe some hoax. Note the play on words in
_Teurs, carotteurs._

_92_ 9 _derniers:_  believers are few even in the upper part of the city
(cf. note to _37_ 27).

_92_ 15 _La culasse:_ we should use the plural in English. Note this
peculiarity of French style, cf. _la face des soldats etait couverte de
sueur_ 'the soldiers' faces were covered with sweat.' Cf. note to _29_ 11,
and _92_ 12.

_92_ 16 canons turcs: cf. note to _40_ 17. These old cannon are set in
the pavement of the quay as posts for the mooring of ships and for
similar uses.

_92_ 24 _A peine vient-il de sauter ... qu':_ 'scarcely has he leaped
when.' _A peine_ reenforces _vient de_. For the inversion cf. note to _5_
32.

_93_ 5 _en carton peint:_ 'of painted pasteboard,' i.e. counterfeit.

_93_ 6 _dromadaire:_ the word is here used correctly according to the
Academy's dictionary, which makes _dromadaire_ a name of the one humped
species of camel. According to more exact usage a dromedary is a high bred
camel for special speed, usually of the one humped species but not
necessarily so, in this sense Tartarin's beast can hardly claim the name.

_93_ 7 _que devenir:_ lit. 'what to become', transl. 'what to do with
myself' Cf. _65_ 15.

_93_ 8 _Ne nous quittons plus:_ 'let us part no more' Cf. note to _7_ 2.

_93_ 15 _s'elancant a corps perdu:_ 'hurling himself headlong,'
desperately.

_93_ 16 _de conserve:_ 'in consort' (with the captain's row boat).
_Conserve_ in the sense of 'the action of preserving' survives only in
this nautical expression, _naviguer de conserve._--'to sail in consort'
(used of ships which sail together so as to help one another).

_93_ 18 _col:_ = _cou_, used in this sense only in certain fixed
expressions, ordinarily = 'collar.'--_en eperon de trireme:_ 'like (cf.
note to _5_ 20) the beak of a trireme.' _Eperon_ ordinarily means 'spur.'
The ancient trireme was a galley with three banks of oars.

_93_ 19 _viennent ensemble se ranger:_ 'come to draw up together,' 'draw
up together', cf. _55_ 8.--_aux flancs du:_ 'alongside.' Note the plural
_flancs_, cf. _a ses cotes_ _37_ 26.

_93_ 21 _A la fin:_ 'I tell you.'

_93_ 22 _a mon bord:_ 'aboard.' _A bord d'un vaisseau_ = 'on board a
ship.'

_93_ 23 _j'en ... zoologique:_ 'I will present him to the Zoological
Garden.'

_93_ 29 _fut:_ subjunctive with _non pas que_.

_93_ 33 _afficher:_ 'make a show of', lit. 'to post'(_affiches_
'placards')

_94_ 1 _mettait le nez:_ 'stuck his nose,' looked out.

_94_ 9 _un wagon de troisieme classe:_ 'a third-class car.' In French
trains there are cars of first, second, and third classes, the third being
the cheapest. The cars were until recently divided into compartments from
each of which a door (_portiere_) opened upon the station platform. These
doors were provided with windows--_filant bon train sur:_ 'making rapidly
for', cf. note to _84_ 23.

_94_ 11 _aux portieres:_ 'at the door Windows', cf. note to _94_ 9.

_94_ 13 _detalait:_ cf. note to _69_ 15.

_94_ 14 _eu pleine Crau:_ 'in the heart of (cf. _2_ 2) the Crau.' The Crau
is a vast, arid plain extending from the lower Rhone eastward. The stones
which cover this plain are fabled to have been showered down by Jupiter to
aid Hercules in his battle with the giant Albion.--lui tenant pied:
'keeping up with it.'

_94_ 15 _rencoigna:_ an old spelling of _rencogna._ The word is
etymologically connected with _coin_; cf. English (Shakespearean) 'coign.'

_94_ 19 _Pas le sou:_ 'penniless'; _je n'ai pas le sou_ = 'I haven't a
cent.'

_94_ 21 _Tarascon!_ for the electrifying sonorousness of this call cf.
note to _1_ 1.

_94_ 27 _il croyait a:_ 'he thought it was'; cf. note to _77_ 25.

_94_ 29 _sympathique:_ 'friendly'; contains also the ideas of
'sympathetic,' 'congenial,' 'responsive.'

_95_ 4 _s'etaient monte la tete:_ _se monter la tete_ = 'to become greatly
excited'; transl. 'had gone wild.'

_95_ 6 _dix ... une marmelade de lions:_ 'ten lions, twenty lions, a mass
of lions.' _Mettre en marmelade_ = 'to smash to a jelly'; cf. _12_ 3.

_95_ 8 _de deux heures:_ cf. note to 42 25.

_95_ 12 _descendre a cloche-pied:_ 'hobble down.' _Clocher_ and _marcher a
cloche-pied_ = 'to hop.'




_EXERCISES


I

TRANSLATION_

1. He has not found any. 2. What will he tell me? 3. They will go away
every Sunday. 4. I told him what they were doing. 5. Some Tarasconians
used to assemble and eat big pieces of beef. 6. This man makes (you) laugh
and sing if you (_use_ 'on') are naturally superstitious. 7. Take some if
you find any. 8. The cap will be sold (_use_ 'on') to the one who does it
most often. 9. Will you tell me what each one had at the end of his gun?
10. Throw it with all your might.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce que les chasseurs font quand le gibier est rare? 2. Ou
s'allongent-ils? 3. Que mangent-ils? 4. Que boivent-ils? 5. Apres le
dejeuner que font-ils? 6. Qui est proclame roi de la chasse? 7. Comment
est-ce que le triomphateur rentre a Tarascon? 8. Qu'est-ce que les
chapeliers vendent? 9. Qui leur en achete? 10. Qu'est-ce qu'il y a dans
les greniers?


_II

TRANSLATION_

1. Great men are bored the rest of the time. 2. It's enough to make you
die of excitement. 3. The fact is that a heroic soul like mine will
scarcely enlarge its horizon at Tarascon. 4. He will seek to tear himself
from his dream. 5. In the long run all he does to forget reality will
serve only to keep him in a state of anger. 6. Do not give me bad advice.
7. He did nothing to alleviate his thirst for adventures. 8. The wind
blows during the heavy summer afternoons. 9. How many times he forgets
himself! 10. Let him come!

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qui s'ennuie? 2. Quelles sont la nature et l'ame de Tartarin? 3. Que
revait-il? 4. Que faisait-il tous les dimanches? 5. Qu'est-ce qu'il
faisait le reste du temps? 6. De quoi se bourrait-il? 7. Pourquoi
faisait-il cela? 8. Que faisait-il par les lourdes apres-midi d'ete?
9. Qu'est-ce qu'il oubliait? 10. Qui etaient-_ils_?


_III

TRANSLATION_

1. She is beside herself. 2. Let him ring for his maid and ask for
('demander') his chocolate. 3. That will make Tartarin laugh while
stifling his cries. 4. How ('comment') does it happen that he has never
left? 5. He almost left Tarascon once. 6. He offered them to her. 7. He
must have his chocolate every morning. 8. However, he never offered it to
him. 9. Besides, he almost received a visit from the Tartars. 10. They
come more and more quickly.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Savez-vous tricoter? 2. Pouvez-vous voir Jeannette? 3. Que fait-elle?
4. Pourquoi est-ce que Tartarin n'a jamais quitte la ville? 5. Qu'est-ce
que les freres Garcio-Camus lui out offert? 6. Avec quels pays ont-ils des
relations? 7. Quel est le plus grand avantage de la maison de
Garcio-Camus? 8. Que faisait-on a l'approche des Tartares? 9. Pourquoi
est-ce que Tartarin n'est jamais alle a Shang-Hai? 10. Quelle est la vie
qu'il lui faut?


_IV

TRANSLATION_

1. At last he will come and stand before him. 2. They are face to face.
3. They looked at each other. 4. Both were standing, Tartarin on one side,
the lion on the other. 5. Up to that time he had not yawned in his face.
6. He rose with an air of supreme contempt. 7. At first he was stupefied,
but after a moment he rushed toward the door. 8. Do not stir. 9. The
women themselves were somewhat reassured by his resolute attitude and
approached the cage. 10. Say no more.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce que le lion de Tarascon a fait quand il est arrive devant la
cage du lion de l'Atlas? 2. Est-ce que celui-ci avait peur de celui-la?
3. Comment est-ce que le lion avait regarde les Tarasconnais? 4. Pourquoi
s'est-il mis en colere? 5. Qu'a-t-il fait? 6. Qui a fui? 7. Est-ce que
Tartarin a fui? 8. Qu'a-t-il fait? 9. Comment les chasseurs de casquettes
ont-ils ete rassures? 10. Qu'est-ce qu'ils out entendu?


_V

TRANSLATION_

1. Did the little boy wake with a start? 2. If he is very much afraid, he
will ask for the light. 3. He was put to bed in the next room. 4. He
intended to go to bed early. 5. That is ('voila') a question which I
cannot answer. 6. He had been gone from Tartarin for more than three
months. 7. Don't move! 8. They imagined they had gone to Algeria. 9. After
three months of waiting he began to pack his trunk. 10. When these (the
latter) fired a shot, those (the former) closed their eyes.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Pourquoi est-ce que les garcons out demande de la lumiere? 2. Pourquoi
est-ce que Tartarin n'est pas parti? 3. Quelle est la question delicate?
4. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin se figurait? 5. Que s'imaginait-il? 6. Qui etait
la victime du mirage et qui ne l'etait pas? 7 Quand et pourquoi a-t-on
commence a murmurer? 8. Comment est-ce que les Tarasconnais out fait voir
qu'ils ne croyaient plus a Tartarin? 9. Qui etaient impitoyables?
10. Qu'est-ce qu'un poltron ne peut pas faire?


_VI

TRANSLATION_

1. Suddenly he appeared on the threshold of the garden-gate. 2. He thought
it his duty to offer some explanation. 3. His head was bare, and he wore
wide trousers of white linen. 4. There was a great movement among the
crowd. 5. I beg your pardon, that is not all; you have forgotten that
there was also a _long_ blue tassel. 6. Besides, my eye-glasses bother me.
7. They obliged him to leave his pretty little home. 8. He was proud, but
it was not apparent. 9. He did not turn, for at the bottom of his heart he
cursed them. 10. I see that all is well.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce qui est arrive vers dix heures? 2. Pourquoi est-ce qu'il
s'est fait un mouvement dans la foule? 3. Quelle etait l'apparence de
Tartarin? 4. Ou portait-il ses fusils? 5. Qu'avait-il a la ceinture?
6. Est-ce tout? 7. Pourquoi est-ce que les lunettes etaient a propos?
8. Pourquoi est-ce que Tartarin n'a pas salue? 9. Aimait-il ses
compatriotes? 10. Qu'a-t-il fait apres avoir quitte sa maison?


_VII

TRANSLATION_

1. My reader would like to put the crossing of a great painter at the head
of this episode. 2. Show me it first on board the _Zouave_, then show me
how it was when Tartarin felt the first pangs. 3. Put it before my eyes.
4. In three days one can make the voyage from France to Algeria. 5. I
shall show it to you struggling with the waves. 6. It begins to stand
erect on the hero's skull. 7. As you go farther into the open sea, the
coast begins to look like something formless. 8. He is in the depths of
his narrow cabin. 9. At the departure of the Zouave the sea became more
rough. 10. As the boat left the port Tartarin went and leaned over the
rail.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Voulez-vous me dire ce que c'est qu'un Teur? 2. Qu'est-ce que Daudet
voudrait etre? 3. Voudriez-vous savoir quelle position la _chechia_ a
prise a la sortie du port? 4. Qu'y a-t-il en tete de cet episode?
5. Tartarin se portait-il bien pendant la traversee? 6. Quelle position la
_chechia_ a-t-elle prise au depart? 7. Quelle position a-t-elle prise dans
le golfe du Lion? 8. Le flot que faisait-il? 9. De quoi le lit avait-il
l'air? 10. Avez-vous jamais eu le mal de mer?


_VIII

TRANSLATION_

1. What is said is not always true. 2. Tartarin must have started with joy
on debarking from the _Zouave_. 3. What is floating in the air is not what
you think. 4. Who are on the shore? 5. I can scarcely see what there is in
the nets which the sailors are pulling in. 6. There was a Moor smoking his
pipe on the quay. 7. He rose from among the stones, threw himself on
Tartarin, and clung to his clothes. 8. They carried off his baggage.
9. Tartarin did not know how to make himself understood. 10. They threw
outlandish names at his head.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Que dit-on de ce qui reste des grands hommes? 2. Pourquoi ce qui
restait de Cervantes a-t-il du tressaillir de joie? 3. Qu'y avait-il sur
la berge? 4. Les sauvages etaient-ils beaux? 5. Qui se disputaient ses
bagages? 6. Que faisaient les uns? 7. Que faisaient les autres?
8. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin faisait? 9. Pourquoi ne pouvait-il pas se faire
comprendre? 10. Quelles langues pouvait-il parler?


_IX

TRANSLATION_

1. There were wild beasts here, but they did not wait for Tartarin. 2. He
remembered that he had not brought along a kid. 3. Great lion-hunters pull
the kid's foot with a string. 4. Nothing came all the same. 5. Not being
afraid, Tartarin cried louder. 6. Something black stooped in front of him.
7. That is surely a lion! 8. Suddenly Tartarin became silent. 9. Nothing
answered the shot. 10. He was afraid and made a leap backward.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'y a-t-il a gauche? 2. Comment Tartarin attendait-il le lion?
3. Qu'est-ce que les grands tueurs de lions faisaient? 4. Comment est-ce
que Tartarin les a imites? 5. De quoi avait-il peur? 6. Qu'est-ce que
l'objet noir a fait? 7. Etait-ce le lion? 8. Comment savez-vous que
c'etait le lion? 9. Apres avoir tire le coup de feu qu'est-ce que Tartarin
a fait? 10. Pourquoi la bete n'est-elle pas revenue?


_X

TRANSLATION_

1. Signal, and then get in. 2. You would have done better not to go to the
city on foot. 3. Tartarin got into the first omnibus that passed. 4. He
perceived that there was a sailor at the back of the omnibus smoking
cigarettes. 5. Opposite him there were some young Moorish women whose eyes
he could not see. 6. The one who was sitting there thought she noticed
that he was looking at her. 7. He had just spoken to the Maltese merchant
with the heavy black beard at the risk of hearing him laugh. 8. From time
to time he was cold. 9. What was he to do? 10. The eyes whose glance
answered his were large and black.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Pourquoi Tartarin est-il monte dans l'omnibus? 2. Aurait-il mieux fait
de ne pas monter dans l'omnibus? 3. Qu'est-ce qu'il aurait du faire au
lieu de monter dans l'omnibus? 4. Qui etait dans l'omnibus? 5. Qu'est-ce
que les dames mauresques venaient de faire? 6. Qu'a fait celle qui etait
assise en face de lui? 7. Pourquoi ne pouvait-il pas voir la figure de la
dame? 8. Est-ce qu'il a vu son poignet? 9. Qu'est-ce que ses mouvements
disaient? 10. Ou Tartarin s'est-il fourre?


_XI

TRANSLATION_

1. He ended by turning his eye toward the table. 2. Their eyes make the
gold pieces frisk. 3. The guard comes up because there are knives
unsheathed and money missing. 4. One evening he strayed into the middle of
this crowd. 5. The hero was thinking of the peace of his heart, when
suddenly angry voices rose. 6. I am twenty francs short. 7. I ask no
better. 8. He was proud to make the acquaintance of the prince whose title
had dazzled him. 9. He turned toward Tartarin sneering. 10. Tartarin made
a step forward without producing the slightest impression upon the
officer.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Quel etait l'effet des terribles yeux? 2. Ou le heros tarasconnais
est-il venu s'egarer? 3. Pourquoi y est-il venu? 4. A quoi pensait-il?
5. Qu'est-ce qui a interrompu ses pensees? 6. Qu'est-ce qui vous manque?
7. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a fait en apprenant que c'etait le prince? 8. Le
titre d'altesse a-t-il produit la meme impression sur les autres que sur
Tartarin? 9. Qu'est-ce que l'officier a fait quand le prince a prononce
son titre? 10. Qu'a-t-il fait quand Tartarin a dit "Je connais le
_preince_"?


_XII

TRANSLATION_

1. The negress appeared on seeing the door open. 2. He retired after
having knocked twice at the postern. 3. The gentlemen were led across the
narrow court. 4. The lady in question seems to me smaller. 5. As a matter
of fact, the suspicion came to me that she was not the same. 6. She seemed
to him so pretty through the smoke which enveloped her entirely!
7. Tartarin bowed and placed his hand on his lips. 8. Baia dropped the
amber mouthpiece without saying anything. 9. The only thing you ('on')
could see any more was her white neck. 10. If you looked at her, she would
laugh.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce qu'Ali a fait? 2. Qu'est-ce que la negresse a fait?
3. Pourquoi semblait-il a Tartarin que ce n'etait pas la dame qu'il avait
vue dans l'omnibus? 4. Ce soupcon est-il reste longtemps dans son esprit?
5. Quelle etait l'apparence de la dame? 6. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a fait
en entrant? 7. Qu'est-ce que Baia a fait? 8. Qu'est-ce qu'on entendait
chez les cafetiers algeriens? 9. Depuis combien de temps Tartarin a-t-il
quitte Alger? 10. Comment les Maures causaient-ils entre eux?


_XIII

TRANSLATION_

1. He refused to believe that, although the insinuation awakened
melancholy in his great soul. 2. He found nobody who seemed ugly to him.
3. Sit down near the fountain, although you are a prey to remorse. 4. We
hear from Tarascon that they have not heard from you for many months.
5. What has become of you? 6. So many of our fellow-countrymen gave some
that I scarcely dare to ask them for it. 7. However, when they came to the
fair they claimed to have known over there a man whose description tallied
with his. 8. He was making for Paris. 9. When he had read that, Tartarin
was ashamed of himself. 10. You think he is hunting lions in Africa.


_QUESTIONS_

1. En quittant Barbassou ou est-ce que Tartarin s'est dirige? 2. Quel
etait l'effet des jurons du capitaine? 3. En arrivant a la maison
qu'est-ce que Tartarin a fait? 4. Comment a-t-il appris ce qu'on pensait
de lui a Tarascon? 5. Que pensait-on de lui? 6. Quel etait le sort de
beaucoup d'autres qui etaient partis pour chasser les lions? 7. Les
marchands negres que pretendaient-ils? 8. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a fait
apres avoir lu le journal? 9. Qu'est-ce qui lui a apparu? 10. Pourquoi
avait-il honte de lui-meme?


_XIV

TRANSLATION_

1. Is he going to begrudge me good horses? Never! 2. Nobody treats me well
any more. 3. It's beginning again! 4. Instead of biting each other they
would do well to take a roundabout way across the plains and stop at a
farm. 5. If they did not fight, they would be able to make up lost time.
6. After which, he swam the river. 7. If you get wet, you will catch cold.
8. At night he feared the marauders, for he had to sleep under the open
sky. 9. You could not lead the life I lead. 10. He could not do anything
else.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce que la diligence avait au lieu de ses chevaux d'autrefois?
2. Comment les chevaux arabes lui brisaient-ils ses brancards? 3. Quelle
sorte de routes traversait-elle? 4. Ou s'arretait-on? 5. Qu'est-ce que le
conducteur faisait faire a la diligence? 6. Apres l'arret que faisait-on
pour rattraper le temps perdu? 7. Ou fallait-il que la diligence couchat?
8. Qu'est-ce que les maraudeurs faisaient? 9. Jusque quand la diligence
continuera-t-elle a mener cette vie? 10. Qu'est-ce que les Arabes en
feront?


_XV

TRANSLATION_

1. After a desperate struggle a man broke through the crowd. 2. Tartarin
himself was rolling on the ground. 3. He shook himself and sat down all
out of breath. 4. As soon as he received the letter, he put aside the
Arabs with a gesture. 5. What under the sun have you done? 6. You are
mistaken; you are not a laughing-stock to the women and children. 7. On
the contrary, you arrive just in time to get into an ugly difficulty.
8. He tried to rescue ('arracher') the lion from the hands of the strange
monks who were taming him. 9. There are hundreds of them in the convent.
10. He belonged to that convent whose ('dont') friars receive gifts which
they never steal.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Ou etait le cordonnier juif? 2. Ou a-t-on fait rouler Tartarin?
3. Qu'est-ce que le prince a fait? 4. Comment est-il arrive ici?
5. Comment Tartarin a-t-il explique son action? 6. Qu'est-ce que le lion
etait pour les negres? 7. De quel couvent faisait-il partie? 8. Qu'est-ce
que les moines font dans ce couvent? 9. A quoi servent les dons recus par
les freres queteurs? 10. Pourquoi les negres ont-ils montre tant d'humeur?


_XVI

TRANSLATION_

1. After several strides the camel lengthened out his long knotty legs. 2.
Tartarin picked himself up. 3. He felt himself grow pale, but had to
resign himself. 4. Nothing could stop him any more. 5. One by one the
Arabs gesticulated and laughed like madmen. 6. Tartarin clung to the hump
and collapsed on it. 7. They had to give up the camel. 8. The old Orient
had something fairy-like (about it), but nothing burlesque. 9. Out of
consideration for Tartarin the prince wandered from plain to plain for
nearly a month. 10. However bizarre their mount was, they felt that it was
picturesque.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce que le chameau a fait? 2. Qu'est-ce qui est arrive a Tartarin
et a la chechia au bout de quelques enjambees? 3. Comment Tartarin se
tenait-il sur le chameau? 4. Comment les Arabes ont-ils fait voir qu'ils
s'amusaient a voir courir le chameau? 5. Tartarin se tenait-il droit?
6. Pourquoi nos tueurs ont-ils renonce an chameau? 7. Quel etait
l'arrangement de la caravane? 8. Ou Tartarin errait-il? 9. Quel est le
caractere de l'Algerie francaise? 10. Comment les parfums du vieil Orient
se compliquent-ils?


_XVII

TRANSLATION_

1. The hero awoke at dawn and saw that his treasure was gone. 2. The next
day he saw that he had been robbed for the first time. 3. He began to weep
bitterly. 4. Now, it was the prince that had deserted him in the heart of
Africa. 5. He was sitting there with his head in his hands; suddenly he
saw the camel looking at him. 6. Tartarin was stupefied on seeing the lion
come forward. 7. He was ten paces from him, and made the saint's slippers
tremble. 8. Everything was there in front of him. 9. Tartarin saw the big
negroes running at him. 10. He had just slain the poor tame lion.

_QUESTIONS_

1. De quoi Tartarin s'est-il acquis la certitude en se reveillant? 2. Dans
quel etat se voyait-il? 3. De quoi doutait-il? 4. Qu'est devenu le prince?
5. Dans quelle position Tartarin etait-il assis? 6. Qu'a-t-il vu?
7. Qu'a-t-il fait? 8. Apres le coup de fusil qu'a-t-on vu dans l'air?
9. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a apercu? 10. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a tue?


_XVIII

TRANSLATION_

1. Put not your trust in princes. 2. He raised his head and asked if the
captain knew where the prince was. 3. I believe that he even let himself
be caught. 4. Besides, I know he saw only the most disagreeable things.
5. Your affair with the prince is known; you must keep your eyes open
mighty wide. 6. From the top of the penitentiary he could see only one
side of the city. 7. Do that; otherwise he will see you somewhere. 8. He
courted Baia from the top of the tower. 9. All that happened ('se passe')
under Tartarin's nose. 10. If you'll take my advice, you'll return to
('en') France, for that is not the first time you have been fleeced.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Qu'est-ce que Tartarin a fait en apprenant que sa Mauresque savait meme
le marseillais? 2. Qu'est-ce que Barbas-sou a dit? 3. Ou etait le prince?
4. Comment l'a-t-on pris? 5. Qu'avait-il fait a Tarascon? 6. Qu'est-ce que
cela fait comprendre a Tartarin? 7. Que faut-il faire en Algerie, d'apres
le capitaine? 8. Quelle est l'histoire du muezzin? 9. Quel conseil le
capitaine donne-t-il a Tartarin? 10. Pourquoi Tartarin ne pouvait-il pas
suivre ce conseil?


_XIX

TRANSLATION_

1. The strangest effect of the mirage is that it makes a man lie
ingenuously. 2. Tartarin had killed only one lion and had sent the skin to
Bravida. 3. The telegram had reached Tarascon two hours ahead of him.
4. The camel had preceded Tartarin without knowing it, covered with dust
and sweat. 5. He added that the camel had seen him kill all his lions.
6. Thereupon the camel hobbled down the station stairs. 7. That is what
brought the Tarasconians' joy to the climax. 8. Tartarin calmly directed
his steps toward his house, followed by his fellow-countrymen.
9. Tartarin, red with happiness, began the tale of his hunt 10. The
Caphunters took his arm familiarly.

_QUESTIONS_

1. Quelle etait la cause de tout ce bruit? 2. Pourquoi le Midi s'est-il
monte la tete? 3. Quel drame le _Semaphore_ a-t-il invente? 4. Qu'est-ce
qui etait deja arrive quand Tartarin a debarque a Marseille? 5. Qu'est-ce
qui a mis le comble a la joie populaire? 6. Quel etait sur Tartarin
l'effet du soleil tarasconnais? 7. Qu'a-t-il dit? 8. Qu'a-t-il fait
ensuite? 9. Comment s'est-il dirige vers la maison du baobab?
10. Qu'a-t-il dit en commencant le recit de ses chasses?



END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tartarin de Tarascon, by Alphonse Daudet

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARTARIN DE TARASCON ***

***** This file should be named 10687.txt or 10687.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/6/8/10687/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Renald Levesque and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


