The Project Gutenberg EBook of Legends, Tales and Poems
by Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Legends, Tales and Poems

Author: Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

Release Date: January 24, 2004 [EBook #10814]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS ***




Produced by Keren Vergon, Arno Peters and PG Distributed Proofreaders




Legends, Tales and Poems

[Illustration: After an etching by B. Maura]



LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS

BY

GUSTAVO ADOLFO BECQUER

EDITED

WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND VOCABULARY

BY

EVERETT WARD OLMSTED, PH.D.

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF THE ROMANCE LANGUAGES IN

CORNELL UNIVERSITY

       *       *       *       *       *

TO

MY MOTHER

       *       *       *       *       *



PREFACE


In preparing this collection of Becquer's legends, tales, and short
poems, which is the only annotated edition of this author's works that
has been published as yet for English-speaking students, the editor
has aimed to give to our schools and colleges a book that may serve,
not only as a reader for first or second year classes, but also as an
introduction to Spanish literature, through the works of one of the
most original and charming authors of the Spanish Romantic school.

Fondness for good literature should be stimulated from the very first,
and the quaint tales and legends of old Spain contained in this
edition, told, as they are, in a most fascinating style, are well
adapted to captivate the student's interest and to lead him to
investigate further the rich mine of Spanish literature. Becquer's
poetry is no less pleasing than his prose, and not much more difficult
to read. With the aid of the ample treatise on Spanish versification
contained in the introduction, the student will be enabled to
appreciate the harmony and rhythm of Becquer's verse, and in all
subsequent reading of Spanish poetry he will find this treatise a
convenient and valuable work of reference.

The Life of Becquer, though concise, is perhaps the most complete that
has yet been published, for it embodies all the data given by previous
biographers and a certain number of facts gathered by the writer at
the time of his last visit to Spain (in 1905-1906), from friends of
Becquer who were then living.

The vocabulary has been made sufficiently complete to free the notes
from that too frequent translation of words or phrases which often
encumbers them.

The notes have been printed in the only convenient place for them, at
the bottom of each page, and will be found to be as complete and
definite as possible on geographical, biographical, historical, or
other points that may not be familiar to the student or the teacher.
All grammatical or syntactical matter, unless of a difficult or
peculiar character, has been omitted, while the literary citations
that abound will, it is hoped, stimulate the student to do further
reading and to make literary comparisons of his own.

It remains for the editor to express his profound gratitude to the
following gentlemen for their aid in collecting facts regarding
Becquer and for their encouragement of this work: the Exc^{mo} Sr.
Conde de las Navas, the Exc^{mo} Sr. Licenciado D. Jose Gestoso y
Perez, and the Exc^{mo} Sr. D. Francisco de Laiglesia. It is his
pleasure also to convey his thanks to Professor George L. Burr of
Cornell University for aid in certain of the historical notes, and
most especially to gratefully acknowledge his indebtedness to the aid,
or rather collaboration, of Mr. Arthur Gordon of Cornell University,
and Mr. W. R. Price of the High School of Commerce, New York City.

  EVERETT WARD OLMSTED
  CORNELL UNIVERSITY
  Ithaca, N.Y.



CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
   LIFE OF BECQUER
   UNPUBLISHED LETTER OF BECQUER
   BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
   SPANISH PROSODY
DESDE MI CELDA--CARTA SEXTA
LOS OJOS VERDES
LA CORZA BLANCA
LA AJORCA DEL ORO
EL CRISTO DE LA CALAVERA
EL BESO
MAESE PÉREZ EL ORGANISTA
LA CRUZ DEL DIABLO
CREED EN DROS
LAS HOJAS SECAS
RIMAS
VOCABULARY



INTRODUCTION


LIFE OF BECQUER


"In Seville, along the Guadalquivir, and close to the bank that leads
to the convent of San Jerónimo, may be found a kind of lagoon, which
fertilizes a miniature valley formed by the natural slope of the bank,
at that point very high and steep. Two or three leafy white poplars,
intertwining their branches, protect the spot from the rays of the
sun, which rarely succeeds in slipping through them. Their leaves
produce a soft and pleasing murmur as the wind stirs them and causes
them to appear now silver, now green, according to the point from
which it blows. A willow bathes its roots in the current of the
stream, toward which it leans as though bowed by an invisible weight,
and all about are multitudes of reeds and yellow lilies, such as grow
spontaneously at the edges of springs and streams.

"When I was a boy of fourteen or fifteen, and my soul was overflowing
with numberless longings, with pure thoughts and with that infinite
hope that is the most precious jewel of youth, when I deemed myself a
poet, when my imagination was full of those pleasing tales of the
classic world, and Rioja in his _silvas_ to the flowers, Herrera in
his tender elegies, and all my Seville singers, the Penates of my
special literature, spoke to me continually of the majestic Bétis, the
river of nymphs, naiads, and poets, which, crowned with belfries and
laurels, flows to the sea from a crystal amphora, how often, absorbed
in the contemplation of my childish dreams, I would go and sit upon
its bank, and there, where the poplars protected me with their shadow,
would give rein to my fancies, and conjure up one of those impossible
dreams in which the very skeleton of death appeared before my eyes in
splendid, fascinating garb! I used to dream then of a happy,
independent life, like that of the bird, which is born to sing, and
receives its food from God. I used to dream of that tranquil life of
the poet, which glows with a soft light from generation to generation.
I used to dream that the city that saw my birth would one day swell
with pride at my name, adding it to the brilliant list of her
illustrious sons, and, when death should put an end to my existence,
that they would lay me down to dream the golden dream of immortality
on the banks of the Bétis, whose praises I should have sung in
splendid odes, and in that very spot where I used to go so often to
hear the sweet murmur of its waves. A white stone with a cross and my
name should be my only monument.

"The white poplars, swaying night and day above my grave, should seem
to utter prayers for my soul in the rustling of their green and silver
leaves. In them the birds should come and nest, that they might sing
at dawn a joyous hymn to the resurrection of the spirit to regions
more serene. The willow, covering the spot with floating shadows,
should lend to it its own vague sadness, as it bent and shed about its
soft, wan leaves, as if to protect and to caress my mortal spoils. The
river, too, which in flood tide might almost come and kiss the border
of the slab o'ergrown with reeds, should lull my sleep with pleasant
music. And when some time had passed, and patches of moss had begun to
spread over the stone, a dense growth of wild morning-glories, of
those blue morning-glories with a disk of carmine in the center, which
I loved so much, should grow up by its side, twining through its
crevices and clothing it with their broad transparent leaves, which,
by I know not what mystery, have the form of hearts. Golden insects
with wings of light, whose buzzing lulls to sleep on heated
afternoons, should come and hover round their chalices, and one would
be obliged to draw aside the leafy curtain to read my name, now
blurred by time and moisture. But why should my name be read? Who
would not know that I was sleeping there?"[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer_, Madrid, 1898, vol. II,
  pp. 242-245. This edition will be understood hereafter in all
  references to the works of Becquer.]

So mused the poet Becquer[1] in the golden days of his youth, when his
veins were swelling with health, when his heart was fired with
ambition, and in his ears was ringing the joyous invitation of his
muse.

  [Footnote 1: The name is spelled indifferently with or without
  accent--_Bécquer_ or _Becquer_. In the choice of the latter
  spelling, the authority of his principal biographer, Ramón Rodriguez
  Correa, has been followed.]

His knowledge of the world was confined to the enchanting city of his
birth. Her gems of art and architecture had wrought themselves into
the fabric of his dreams; he had mused in her palm-gardens, worshiped
in her temples, and dreamed long afternoons on the shores of her
historic river. He knew nothing of the cold, prosaic world of selfish
interests. The time had not yet come when, in bitterness of spirit,
and wrapping his mantle about him against the chill wind of
indifference, he should say: "To-day my sole ambition is to be a
supernumerary in the vast human comedy, and when my silent role is
ended, to withdraw behind the scenes, neither hissed nor applauded,
making my exit unnoticed."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, vol. II, p. 251.]

Indeed, in those later days of trial and hardship, he would often look
out wearily upon Madrid, the city of his adoption, the scene of his
crushing struggle with necessity, as it lay outspread before his
windows,--"dirty, black, and ugly as a fleshless skeleton, shivering
under its immense shroud of snow,"[1] and in his mind he would conjure
up the city of his youth, his ever cherished Seville, "with her
_Giralda_ of lacework, mirrored in the trembling Guadalquivir, with
her narrow and tortuous Moorish streets, in which one fancies still he
hears the strange cracking sound of the walk of the Justiciary King;
Seville, with her barred windows and her love-songs, her iron
door-screens and her night watchmen, her altar-pieces and her stories,
her brawls and her music, her tranquil nights and her fiery
afternoons, her rosy dawns and her blue twilights; Seville, with all
the traditions that twenty centuries have heaped upon her brow, with
all the pomp and splendor of her southern nature."[2] No words of
praise seemed too glowing for her ardent lover.

  [Footnote 1: _Ibid_., vol. III, p. iii.]

  [Footnote 2: _Obras_, vol. III, pp. 109-110.]

By some strange mystery, however, it had been decreed by fate that he
should only meet with disappointment in every object of his love. The
city of his birth was no exception to the rule: since Becquer's death
it has made but little effort to requite his deep devotion or satisfy
his youthful dreams. You may search "the bank of the Guadalquivir that
leads to the ruined convent of San Jerónimo," you may spy among the
silvery poplars or the willows growing there, you may thrust aside the
reeds and yellow lilies or the tangled growth of morning-glories, but
all in vain--no "white stone with a cross" appears. You may wander
through the city's many churches, but no tomb to the illustrious poet
will you find, no monument in any square. His body sleeps well-nigh
forgotten in the cemetery of San Nicolás in Madrid.

If you will turn your steps, however, to the _barrio_ of Seville in
which the celebrated D. Miguel de Mañara, the original type of _Juan
Tenorio_ and the _Estudiante de Salamanca_, felt the mysterious blow
and saw his own funeral train file by, and will enter the little
street of the Conde de Barajas, you will find on the facade of the
house No. 26 a modest but tasteful tablet bearing the words


  EN ESTA CASA NACIÓ
  GUSTAVO ADOLFO
  BECQUER
  XVII FEBRERO MDCCCXXXVI.[1]

  [Footnote 1: This memorial, which was uncovered on January 10th,
  1886, is due to a little group of Becquer's admirers, and especially
  to the inspiration of a young Argentine poet, Román Garcia Pereira
  (whose _Canto á Becquer_, published in _La Ilustración Artística_,
  Barcelona, December 27, 1886, is a tribute worthy of the poet who
  inspired it), and to the personal efforts of the illustrious Seville
  scholar, Don José Gestoso y Pérez. It is only fair to add here that
  there is also an inferior street in Seville named for Becquer.]

Here Gustavo Adolfo Dominguez Becquer opened his eyes upon this
inhospitable world. Eight days later he was baptized in the church of
San Lorenzo.[1] He was one of a family of eight sons, Eduardo,
Estanislao, Valeriano, Gustavo Adolfo, Alfredo, Ricardo, Jorge, and
Jose. His father, Don Jose Dominguez Becquer, was a well-known Seville
genre painter. He died when Gustavo was but a child of five, too young
to be taught the principles of his art; but he nevertheless bequeathed
to him the artistic temperament that was so dominant a trait in the
poet's genius. Becquer's mother, Doña Joaquina, survived his father
but a short time, and left her children orphaned while they were yet
very young. Gustavo was but nine and a half years old at the time of
his mother's death. Fortunately an old and childless uncle, D. Juan
Vargas, took charge of the motherless boys until they could find homes
or employment.

  [Footnote 1: The following is a copy of his baptismal record:

  "En jueves 25 de Febrero de 1836 años D. Antonio Rodriguez Arenas
  Pbro. con licencia del infrascrito Cura de la Parroquial de Sn.
  Lorenzo de Sevilla: bautizó solemnemente á Gustavo Adolfo que nació
  en 17 de dicho mes y año hijo de José Dominguez Vequer (_sic_) y
  Doña Juaquina (_sic_) Bastida su legitima mujer. Fué su madrina Doña
  Manuela Monchay vecina de la collación de Sn. Miguel á la que se
  advirtió el parentesco espiritual y obligaciones y para verdad lo
  firmé.--Antonio Lucena Cura." See La _Illustración Artística_,
  Barcelona, December 27, 1886, pp. 363-366. Citations from this
  periodical will hereafter refer to the issue of this date.]

Gustavo Adolfo received his first instruction at the College of San
Antonio Abad. After the loss of his mother his uncle procured for him
admission to the College of San Telmo, a training school for
navigators, situated on the banks of the Guadalquivir in the edifice
that later became the palace of the Dukes of Montpensier. This
establishment had been founded in 1681 in the ancient suburb of
Marruecos as a reorganization of the famous _Escuela de Mareantes_
(navigators) of Triana. The Government bore the cost of maintenance
and instruction of the pupils of this school, to which were admitted
only poor and orphaned boys of noble extraction. Gustavo fulfilled all
these requirements. Indeed, his family, which had come to Seville at
the close of the sixteenth century or at the beginning of the
seventeenth century, from Flanders, was one of the most distinguished
of the town. It had even counted among its illustrious members a
Seville Veinticuatro, and no one who was unable to present proof of
noble lineage could aspire to that distinction.[1]

  [Footnote 1: "Don Martin Becquer, _mayorazgo_ and _Veinticuatro_, of
  Seville, native of Flanders, married Doña Úrsula Díez de Tejada.
  Born to them were Don Juan and Doña Mencia Becquer. The latter
  married Don Julián Dominguez, by whom she had a son Don Antonio
  Domínguez y Becquer, who in turn contracted marriage with Doña Maria
  Antonia Insausti y Bausa. Their son was Don Jose Dominguez Insausti
  y Bausa, husband of Doña Joaquina Bastida y Vargas, and father of
  the poet Becquer." The arms of the family "were a shield of azure
  with a chevron of gold, charged with five stars of azure, two leaves
  of clover in gold in the upper corners of the shield, and in the
  point a crown of gold." The language of the original is not
  technical, and I have translated literally. See _Carta á M. Achille
  Fouquier_, by D. Jose Gestoso y Pérez, in _La Ilustración
  Artística_, pp. 363-366.]

Among the students of San Telmo there was one, Narciso Campillo, for
whom Gustavo felt a special friendship,--a lad whose literary tastes,
like his own, had developed early, and who was destined, later on, to
occupy no mean position in the field of letters. Writing of those days
of his youth, Señor Campillo says: "Our childhood friendship was
strengthened by our life in common, wearing as we did the same
uniform, eating at the same table, and sleeping in an immense hall,
whose arches, columns, and melancholy lamps, suspended at intervals, I
can see before me still.

"I enjoy recalling this epoch of our first literary utterance
(_vagido_), and I say _our_, for when he was but ten years old and I
eleven, we composed and presented in the aforesaid school (San Telmo)
a fearful and extravagant drama, which, if my memory serves me right,
was entitled Los _Conjurados_ ('The Conspirators'). We likewise began
a novel. I wonder at the confidence with which these two children, so
ignorant in all respects, launched forth upon the two literary lines
that require most knowledge of man, society, and life. The time was
yet to come when by dint of painful struggles and hard trials they
should possess that knowledge, as difficult to gain as it is
bitter!"[1]

  [Footnote 1: Article on Gustavo Adolfo Becquer, by Narciso Campillo,
  in La Ilustración Artística, pp. 358-360]

Shortly after the matriculation of young Becquer, the College of San
Telmo was suppressed by royal orders, and the lad found himself in the
streets. He was then received into the home of his godmother, Doña
Manuela Monchay, who was a woman of kind heart and much intelligence.
She possessed a fair library, which was put at the disposal of the
boy; and here he gratified his love for reading, and perfected his
literary taste. Two works that had considerable influence upon him at
this time were the Odes of Horace, translated by P. Urbano Campos, and
the poems of Zorrilla. He began to write verses of his own, but these
he later burned.

"In 1849," says Señor Campillo, "there were two noteworthy painters in
Seville, whose studios were open to and frequented by numerous
students, future rivals, each in his own imagination, of the glories
of Velasquez and Murillo. One of these studios, situated in the same
building as the Museo de Pinturas, was that of D. Antonio Cabral
Bejarano, a man not to be forgotten for his talent, and perhaps also
for his wit, the delight of those who knew him. The other, situated in
an upper room of the Moorish _alcázar de Abdelasis_, near the patio
_de Banderas_, was directed by D. Joaquin Dominguez Becquer, a brother
and disciple of D. Jose, Gustavo's father."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Narciso Campillo, _loc_. cit.]

In spite of this relationship, Gustavo Adolfo, at the age of fourteen,
entered the studio of Bejarano. There he remained for two years,
practicing the art of drawing, for which he had a natural talent. He
then came under the instruction of his uncle, who, judging that his
nephew was even better qualified for a literary than for an artistic
career, advised him to follow the former, and procured for him a few
Latin lessons. Meanwhile Gustavo continued to enlarge his poetical
horizon by reading from the great poets and by the contemplation of
the beauties of nature. With his friend Campillo he composed the first
three cantos of a poem entitled La _Conquista de Sevilla_, and with
him he wandered about the beautiful city of his birth and dreamed such
dreams as the one with which this Introduction begins.

Gustavo's godmother, who was a woman in easy circumstances and without
children or near relatives, would doubtless have bequeathed to him her
property had he fulfilled her wishes and settled down to an honorable
mercantile life. But the child, who had learned to draw and to compose
almost before he could write, and who had always paled before the
simplest problem of arithmetic, could not reconcile himself to such a
life. The artist within him rebelled, and at the age of seventeen and
a half, feeling the attraction of the capital strong upon him, he bade
farewell to the friends of his youth and set out to seek for fame and
fortune. It was in the autumn of 1854 that Becquer arrived in Madrid,
"with empty pockets, but with a head full of treasures that were not,
alas, to enrich him." Here he encountered an indifference that he had
not dreamed of; and here he remained in the shadow of oblivion, eking
out a miserable existence of physical as well as mental suffering, in
utter loneliness of spirit, until he was joined in 1856 by one who
came to be his lifelong friend and first biographer--Ramón Rodriguez
Correa, who had come to the capital with the same aims as Becquer, and
whose robust health and jovial temperament appealed singularly to the
sad and ailing dreamer. The new-found friend proved indeed a godsend,
for when, in 1857, Gustavo was suffering from a terrible illness,
Correa, while attending him, chanced to fall upon a writing entitled
_El caudillo de las manos rojas, tradición india_. Charmed by its
originality in form and conception, he urged his friend to publish it.
Becquer acquiesced, and the story was accepted and published by La
_Crónica_. The joy of this first success, and perhaps the material aid
that resulted, must have had a great deal to do with Gustavo's speedy
recovery.

A short time after this he entered with his friend Correa the office
of the _Dirección de Bienes Nacionales_ as copyist, at the munificent
salary of some $150 a year. The employment was decidedly contrary to
his taste, and to amuse his tedium he used often to sketch or read
from his favorite poets. One day, as he was busy sketching, the
Director entered, and, seeing a group about Gustavo's chair,--for the
young artist's sketches were eagerly awaited and claimed by his
admiring associates,--stole up from behind and asked, "What is this?"
Gustavo, suspecting nothing, went on with his sketch, and answered in
a natural tone, "This is Ophelia, plucking the leaves from her
garland. That old codger is a grave-digger. Over there..." At this,
noticing that every one had risen, and that universal silence reigned,
Becquer slowly turned his head. "Here is one too many," said the
Director, and the artist was dismissed that very day.

It cannot be said that he received the news of his dismissal
regretfully, for he had accepted the position largely to please a
sympathetic friend. Slight as was the remuneration, however, it had
aided him to live; and when this resource was removed, Gustavo was
again obliged to depend upon his wits. His skill with the brush served
him in good stead at this time, and he earned a little money by aiding
a painter who had been employed by the Marquis of Remisa to decorate
his palace, but who could not do the figures in the fresco.

In 1857, together with other _littérateurs_, Becquer undertook the
preparation and direction of a work entitled _Historia de los Temples
de España_.[1] Like so many of the author's plans, this work remained
unfinished; but from the single volume that appeared can be seen how
vast was the scope of the work, and how scholarly its execution.
Gustavo is himself the author of some of the best pages contained in
the volume, as, for example, those of the Introduction and of the
chapters on _San Juan de los_ Reyes. He is likewise the author of many
of the excellent sketches that adorn the work, notably that of the
_portada_. These sketches, as well as others published elsewhere, show
how eminent his work as artist would have been, had he decided to
cultivate that field instead of literature.

  [Footnote 1: The complete title of the work is _Historia de los
  Templos de España, publicada bajo la protección de SS. MM. AA. y muy
  reverendos señores arzobispos y obispos--dirigida por D. Juan de la
  Puerta Vizcaino y D. Gustavo Adolfo Becquer. Tomo I, Madrid, 1857.
  Imprenta y Estereotipia Española de los Señores Nieto y Compañía._]

Essentially an artist in temperament, he viewed all things from the
artist's standpoint. His distaste for politics was strong, and his
lack of interest in political intrigues was profound. "His artistic
soul, nurtured in the illustrious literary school of Seville," says
Correa, "and developed amidst Gothic Cathedrals, lacy Moorish and
stained-glass windows, was at ease only in the field of tradition. He
felt at home in a complete civilization, like that of the Middle Ages,
and his artisticopolitical ideas and his fear of the ignorant crowd
made him regard with marked predilection all that was aristocratic and
historic, without however refusing, in his quick intelligence, to
recognize the wonderful character of the epoch in which he lived.
Indolent, moreover, in small things,--and for him political parties
were small things,--he was always to be found in the one in which were
most of his friends, and in which they talked most of pictures,
poetry, cathedrals, kings, and nobles. Incapable of hatred, he never
placed his remarkable talent as a writer at the service of political
animosities, however certain might have been his gains."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Ramón Rodriguez Correa, _Prólogo_, in _Obras de
  Becquer_, vol. I, xvi.]

Early in his life in Madrid, Gustavo came under the influence of a
charming young woman, Julia Espín y Guillén.[1] Her father was
director of the orchestra in the Teatro Real, and his home was a
rendezvous of young musicians, artists, and _littérateurs_. There
Gustavo, with Correa, Manuel del Palacio, Augusto Ferrán, and other
friends, used to gather for musical and literary evenings, and there
Gustavo used to read his verses. These he would bring written on odd
scraps of paper, and often upon calling cards, in his usual careless
fashion.

  [Footnote 1: She later married Don Benigno Quiroga Ballesteros, an
  illustrious engineer, congressman, minister of state, and man of
  public life, who is still living. She died in January, 1907.]

His friends were not slow in discovering that the tall, dark, and
beautiful Julia was the object of his adoration, and they advised him
to declare his love openly. But his timid and retiring nature imposed
silence upon his lips, and he never spoke a word of love to her. It
cannot be said, moreover, that the impression created upon the young
lady by the brilliant youth was such as to inspire a return of his
mute devotion. Becquer was negligent in his dress and indifferent to
his personal appearance, and when Julia's friends upbraided her for
her hardness of heart she would reply with some such curt and cruel
epigram as this: "Perhaps he would move my heart more if he affected
my stomach less."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Facts learned from conversation with Don Manuel del
  Palacio, since deceased.

  The editor of this sketch is indebted to the courtesy of the
  Exc^{mo}. Sr. D. Benigno Quiroga Ballesteros and to his lately
  deceased wife, Doña Julia, the muse of at least some of Becquer's
  _Rimas_, for an opportunity to examine a couple of albums containing
  some of the poet's verse and a most interesting collection of pencil
  sketches, which but confirm his admiration for Becquer's artistic
  talent. Here is a list of the sketches:

  _First Album:_

  Lucia di Lamermoor--Eleven sketches, including frontispiece.

  A dream, or rather a nightmare, in which a man is pictured in a
  restless sleep, with a small devil perched upon his knees, who
  causes to fly as a kite above the sleeper's head a woman in graceful
  floating garments.

  A fat and jolly horned devil in the confessional box, with a
  confessor of the fair sex kneeling at one side, while at the extreme
  right two small acolytes point out to each other a suspicious
  looking tail that protrudes from beneath her skirts, thus stamping
  her as Satan's own.

  A belfry window with a swinging bell, and bestriding the bell a
  skeleton tightly clutching the upper part of it--ringing the
  _ánimas_ perhaps.

  Gustavo himself seated smoking, leaning back in his chair, and in
  the smoke that rises a series of women, some with wings.

  A nun in horror at discovering, as she turns down the covers of her
  bed, a merry devil.

  A woman's coffin uncovered by the sexton, while a lover standing by
  exclaims, "¡¡Cascaras!! ¡cómo ha cambiadd!"

  A scene at the _Teatro Real_ with Señor Espin y Guillén in a small
  group behind the scenes, and a prima donna singing. Actors standing
  apart in the wings.

  A visit to the cemetery. A skeleton thrusting out his head from his
  burial niche, and a young man presenting his card. "DIFUNTO: No
  recibo. VISITANTE: Pues hai (_sic_) queda la targeta (_sic_)."

  A fine sketch of "Eleonora," a stately form in rich
  fifteenth-century garb.

  A number of sketches of women, knights, monks, devils, soldiers,
  skeletons, etc.

  _Second Album: Les morts pow rire, Bizarreries dédiées à
  Mademoiselle Julie, par G. A. Becker (sic)_.

  Fantastic frontispiece of skulls, bones, and leafy fronds, and two
  young lovers seated, sketching.

  Skeletons playing battledore and shuttlecock with skulls.

  A tall slim skeleton and a round short one.

  Skeletons at a ball.

  A skeleton widow visiting her husband's grave.

  The husband returning her visit, and coming to share her lunch in
  the park.

  A circus of skeletons, in two scenes: (1) Leaping through the hoop.
  (2) One skeleton balancing himself, head downward, on the head of
  another who is standing.

  A skeleton singer on the stage.

  A skeleton horse leaping a hurdle.

  A skeleton drum-major with his band.

  A skeleton bull-fight.

  A duel between skeletons.

  A tournament on skeleton horses.

  A woman recently deceased, surrounded by skeletons offering their
  compliments. They are presented by one of then number, with hat in
  hand.

  A balcony courting scene between skeleton lovers.

  The word _FIN_ in bones concludes the series of grotesque and
  uncanny sketches, which but emphasize a fact ever present in the
  poet's mind--that while we are in life we _are_ in death.]

Finding his devotion to Julia unrequited, Becquer, in a rebellious
mood, and having come under the influence of the charms and
blandishments of a woman of Soria, a certain Casta Estéban y Navarro,
contracted, in or about the year 1861, an unfortunate marriage, which
embittered the rest of his life and added cares and expenses which he
could ill support. He lived with his wife but a short time, during
which period two sons were born to them--Gustavo, whose later career
was unfortunately not such as to bring credit to the memory of his
illustrious father, and, Jorge, who died young. Becquer was
passionately fond of his children, and succeeded in keeping them with
him after the separation from his wife. They were constantly the
objects of his affectionate solicitude, and his last thoughts were for
them.

About 1858 the newspaper _El Contemporáneo_ had been founded by the
able and broad-minded Jose Luis Albareda, and Correa, who was
associated with the management, succeeded in obtaining for his friend
a position on its staff. Becquer entered upon his new labors in 1861,
and was a fairly regular contributor until the suppression of the
paper. Here he published the greater part of his legends and tales, as
well as his remarkable collection of letters _Desde mi Celda_ ("From
my Cell"). The following year his brother Valeriano, who up to that
time had exercised his talents as a genre painter in Seville, came to
join him in Madrid. He too had been unfortunate in his domestic
relations, and the brothers joined in sympathy to form a new
household. A period of comparative comfort seemed to open up before
them. This period was of short duration, however; for Gustavo (who was
never strong) soon fell ill, and was obliged to withdraw from the
capital, in search of purer air, to the historic monastery of Veruela,
situated on the Moncayo, a mountain in northern Spain. His brother
Valeriano accompanied him, and there they passed a year in complete
isolation from the rest of the world. The spur of necessity, however,
compelled them both to keep to their work, and while Gustavo was
writing such legends as that of _Maese Pérez_, and composing his
fascinating _Cartas desde mi Celda_, Valeriano was painting Aragonese
scenes such as La _Vendimia_ ("The Vintage") or fanciful creations
such as _El Barco del Diablo_ or La _Pecadora_.

The next year the two brothers returned to the capital, and Gustavo,
together with his friend D. Felipe Vallarino, began the publication of
_La Gaceta literaria_, of brief but brilliant memory. During this same
year and during 1863 Gustavo continued on the staff of _El
Contemporáneo_, enriching its pages with an occasional legend of
singular beauty.

At the Baths of Fitero in Navarre, whither, with his inseparable
brother, he had gone to recuperate his health in the summer of 1864,
Gustavo composed the fantastic legend of the _Miserere_, and others no
less interesting. On his return from Fitero he continued in _El
Contemporáneo_, and shortly after entered a ministerial daily, the
irksome duties of which charge he bore with resignation.

At this time Luis Gonzalez Bravo, a man of _fine_ literary
discrimination, whatever may be thought of him politically, was prime
minister under Isabel II. He had become interested in the work of
Gustavo, and, knowing the dire financial straits in which the young
poet labored, he thought to diminish these anxieties and thus give him
more time to devote to creative work by making him censor of novels. A
new period of calm and comparative comfort began, and for the first
time in his life Becquer had the leisure to carry out a long-cherished
project, at once his own desire and the desire of his friends: that of
gathering together in one volume all his scattered verse and of adding
to the collection other poems as well that had not yet seen the light.
This he did, and the completed volume so charmed his friend and
patron, Gonzalez Bravo, that he offered of his own accord to write a
prologue for the work and to print it at his own expense. But in 1868
came the revolution which dethroned Isabel II, and in the confusion
that followed the downfall of the ministry and the hasty withdrawal of
Gonzalez Bravo to the French frontier the volume of poems was lost.
This was a sad blow to Becquer, but he courageously set to work to
repair the loss, and with painful effort succeeded in recalling and
rewriting his _Rimas_, which were published after his death in the
third volume of his works by his friend Correa.

Becquer, with extreme punctiliousness, tendered his resignation as
censor of novels. A pension of 10,000 reals that the government had
assigned to Valeriano for the study of national customs was withdrawn,
and both brothers were again deprived of permanent employment. They
joined forces, and while the one sketched admirable woodcuts for the
_Almanac Anual_ of Gaspar y Roig, the other wrote such original
articles as _Las Hojas Secas_, or chafed under such hack work as the
translation of popular novels from the French, which language he read
with ease, though he did not speak it well. Gustavo had already felt
and described the charm of the old Moorish city of Toledo in his
_Historia de los Templos de España_, and in 1869 he and Valeriano
moved their little household temporarily to the city of their dreams,
with a view to finding inspiration for their pens and brushes, and
thus subsistence for their joint families.[1]

  [Footnote 1: It was at this time that Gustavo wrote the letter which
  is published for the first time on page xxxix.]

An amusing account is given by Correa of an adventure that befell the
two brothers one night in Toledo as they were wandering about its
streets. He says: "One magnificent moonlight night both artists
decided to contemplate their beloved city bathed in the fantastic
light of the chilly orb. The painter armed with pencils and the writer
with his souvenirs had abandoned the old city and on a ruined wall had
given themselves up for hours to their artistic chatter ... when a
couple of _Guardias civiles_, who had doubtless those days been
looking for marauders, approached them. They heard something of apses,
squinches, ogives, and other terms as suspicious or as dangerous ...
and observing the disarray of those who thus discoursed, their long
beards, their excited mien, the lateness of the hour, the solitude of
the place, and obeying especially that axiomatic certainty of the
Spanish police to blunder, they angrily swooped down upon those night
birds, and, in spite of protests and unheard explanations, took them
to continue their artistic themes in the dim and horrid light of a
dungeon in the Toledo jail.... We learned all this in the office of
_EC Contemporáneo_, on receiving from Gustavo an explanatory letter
full of sketches representing the probable passion and death of both
innocents. The staff _en masse_ wrote to the mistaken jailer, and at
last we saw the prisoners return safe and sound, parodying in our
presence with words and pencils the famous prisons of Silvio
Pellico."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, pp. xxi-xxiii.]

In this same year, 1869, we find the brothers housed in modest
quarters in the Barrio de la Concepción in the outskirts of Madrid.
Here Adolfo wrote some new poems and began a translation of Dante for
a _Biblioteca de grandes autores_ which had been planned and organized
by _La Ilustración de Madrid_, founded by Gasset in 1870. The first
number of this noteworthy paper appeared on January 12 of that year,
and from its inception to the time of his death Gustavo was its
director and a regular contributor.[1] His brother Valeriano
illustrated many of its pages, and here one can form some idea of his
skill as a portrayer of Spanish types and customs. "But who could
foretell," says their friend Campillo, "that within so short a time
his necrology and that of his beloved brother were to appear in this
same paper?"[2]

  [Footnote 1: These articles of Gustavo's have not, for the most
  part, been published elsewhere. There remains for the future editor
  of his complete works a large number of such articles, which it
  would be well worth while to collect.]

  [Footnote 2: _La Ilustración Artística_, p. 360.]

Their life of hardship and anxiety was tearing to shreds the delicate
health of the two young artists, and on September 23, 1870, Valeriano
breathed his last in the arms of Gustavo. His death was a blow from
which Gustavo never recovered. It was as though the mainspring was
broken in a watch; and, though the wheels still turned of their own
momentum, the revolutions were few in number and soon ceased. "A
strange illness," says Correa, "and a strange manner of death was
that! Without any precise symptom, that which was diagnosed as
pneumonia turned to hepatitis, becoming in the judgment of others
pericarditis, and meanwhile the patient, with his brain as clear as
ever and his natural gentleness, went on submitting himself to every
experiment, accepting every medicine, and dying inch by inch."[1]

  [Footnote 1: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xix.]

Shortly before the end he turned to his friends who surrounded his
bed, and said to them, "Acordaos de mis niños."[1] He realized that he
had extended his arm for the last time in their behalf, and that now
that frail support had been withdrawn. "At last the fatal moment came,
and, pronouncing clearly with his trembling lips the words 'Todo
mortal!', his pure and loving soul rose to its Creator."[2] He died
December 22, 1870.

  [Footnote 1: This fact was learned from a conversation with Don
  Francisco de Laiglesia, who, with Correa, Ferrán and others, was
  present when the poet breathed his last.]

  [Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xx.]

Thanks to the initiative of Ramón Rodriguez Correa and to the aid of
other friends, most of the scattered tales, legends, and poems of
Becquer were gathered together and published by Fernando Fe, Madrid,
in three small volumes. In the Prologue of the first edition Correa
relates the life of his friend with sympathy and enthusiasm, and it is
from this source that we glean most of the facts that are to be known
regarding the poet's life. The appearance of these volumes caused a
marked effect, and their author was placed by popular edict in the
front rank of contemporary writers.

Becquer may be said to belong to the Romantic School, chief of whose
exponents in Spain were Zorilla and Espronceda. The choice of
mediaeval times as the scene of his stories, their style and
treatment, as well as the personal note and the freedom of his verse,
all stamp him as a Romanticist.

His legends, with one or two exceptions, are genuinely Spanish in
subject, though infused with a tender melancholy that recalls the
northern ballads rather than the writings of his native land. His love
for old ruins and monuments, his archaeological instinct, is evident
in every line. So, too, is his artistic nature, which finds a greater
field for its expression in his prose than in his verse. Add to this a
certain bent toward the mysterious and supernatural, and we have the
principal elements that enter into the composition of these legends,
whose quaint, weird beauty not only manifests the charm that naturally
attaches to popular or folk tales, but is due especially to the way in
which they are told by one who was at once an artist and a poet.

Zorilla has been said to be Becquer's most immediate precursor, in
that he possesses the same instinct for the mysterious. But, as Blanco
Garcia observes, "Becquer is less ardent than Zorilla, and preferred
the strange traditions in which some unknown supernatural power hovers
to those others, more probable, in which only human passions with
their caprices and outbursts are involved."[1] Correa says of his
legends that they "can compete with the tales of Hoffmann and of
Grimm, and with the ballads of Rückert and of Uhland," and that
"however fantastic they may be, however imaginary they may appear,
they always contain such a foundation of truth, a thought so real,
that in the midst of their extraordinary form and contexture a fact
appears spontaneously to have taken place or to be able to take place
without the slightest difficulty, if you but analyze the situation of
the personages, the time in which they live, or the circumstances that
surround them."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _La Literatura Espanola en el Siglo XIX_, Madrid, 1891,
  vol. II, p. 275.]

  [Footnote 2: Correa, _op. cit._, p. xxx.]

The subtle charm of such legends as _Los Ojos Verdes_, _La Corza
Blanca_, _Maese Pérez el Organista_, etc., full of local color as they
are, and of an atmosphere of old Spain, is hard to describe, but none
the less real. One is caught by the music of the prose at the first
lines, enraptured by the weird charm of the story, and held in
breathless interest until the last words die away. If Becquer's phrase
is not always classic, it is, on the other hand, vigorous and
picturesque; and when one reflects upon the difficult conditions under
which his writings were produced, in the confusion of the
printing-office, or hurriedly in a miserable attic to procure food for
the immediate necessities of his little family, and when one likewise
recalls the fact that they were published in final book form only
after the author's death, and without retouching, the wonder grows
that they are written in a style so pleasing and so free from
harshness.

Becquer's prose is doubtless at its best in his letters entitled
_Desde mi Celda_, written, as has been said, from the monastery of
Veruela, in 1864. Read his description of his journey to the ancient
Aragonese town of Tarazona, picturesquely situated on the River
Queiles, of his mule trip over the glorious Moncayo, of the
peacefulness and quiet of the old fortified monastery of Veruela, and
you will surely feel inspired to follow him in his wanderings. Writing
of his life in the seclusion of Veruela, Becquer says: "Every
afternoon, as the sun is about to set, I sally forth upon the road
that runs in front of the monastery doors to wait for the postman, who
brings me the Madrid newspapers. In front of the archway that gives
entrance to the first inclosure of the abbey stretches a long avenue
of poplars so tall that when their branches are stirred by the evening
breeze their summits touch and form an immense arch of verdure. On
both sides of the road, leaping and tumbling with a pleasant murmur
among the twisted roots of the trees, run two rivulets of crystalline
transparent water, as cold as the blade of a sword and as gleaming as
its edge. The ground, over which float the shadows of the poplars,
mottled with restless spots of light, is covered at intervals with the
thickest and finest of grass, in which grow so many white daisies that
they look at first sight like that rain of petals with which the
fruit-trees carpet the ground on warm April days. On the banks of the
stream, amid the brambles and the reeds, grow wild violets, which,
though well-nigh hidden amongst their creeping leaves, proclaim
themselves afar by their penetrating perfume. And finally, also near
the water and forming as it were a second boundary, can be seen
between the poplar trunks a double row of stocky walnut-trees with
dark, round, compact tops." About half way down the avenue stands a
marble cross, which, from its color, is known in the vicinity as the
Black Cross of Veruela. "Nothing is more somberly beautiful than this
spot. At one end of the road the view is closed by the monastery, with
its pointed arches, its peaked towers, and its imposing battlemented
walls; on the other, the ruins of a little hermitage rise, at the foot
of a hillock bestrewn with blooming thyme and rosemary. There, seated
at the foot of the cross, and holding in my hands a book that I
scarcely ever read and often leave forgotten on the steps of the
cross, I linger for one, two, and sometimes even four hours waiting
for the papers." At last the post arrives, and the _Contemporáneo_ is
in his hands. "As I was present at its birth, and as since its birth I
have lived its feverish and impassioned life, _El Contemporáneo_ is
not for me a common newspaper like the rest, but its columns are
yourselves, my friends, my companions in hope or disappointment, in
failure or triumph, in joy or bitterness. The first impression that I
feel upon receiving it, then, is one of joy, like that experienced
upon opening a letter on whose envelope we recognize a dear familiar
handwriting, or when in a foreign land we grasp the hand of a
compatriot and hear our native tongue again. The peculiar odor of the
damp paper and the printer's ink, that characteristic odor which for a
moment obscures the perfume of the flowers that one breathes here on
every hand, seems to strike the olfactory memory, a strange and keen
memory that unquestionably exists, and it brings back to me a portion
of my former life,--that restlessness, that activity, that feverish
productiveness of journalism. I recall the constant pounding and
creaking of the presses that multiply by thousands the words that we
have just written, and that have come all palpitating from our pens. I
recall the strain of the last hours of publication, when night is
almost over and copy scarce. I recall, in short, those times when day
has surprised us correcting an article or writing a last notice when
we paid not the slightest attention to the poetic beauties of the
dawn. In Madrid, and for us in particular, the sun neither rises nor
sets: we put out or light the lights, and that is the only reason we
notice it."

At last he opens the sheet. The news of the clubs or the Cortes
absorbs him until the failing light of the setting sun warns him that,
though he has read but the first columns, it is time to go. "The
shadows of the mountains fall rapidly, and spread over the plain. The
moon begins to appear in the east like a silver circle gleaming
through the sky, and the avenue of poplars is wrapped in the uncertain
dusk of twilight.... The monastery bell, the only one that still hangs
in its ruined Byzantine tower, begins to call to prayers, and one near
and one afar, some with sharp metallic notes, and some with solemn,
muffled tones, the other bells of the hillside towns reply.... It
seems like a harmony that falls from heaven and rises at the same time
from the earth, becomes confounded, and floats in space, intermingling
with the fading sounds of the dying day and the first sighs of the
newborn night.

"And now all is silenced,--Madrid, political interests, ardent
struggles, human miseries, passions, disappointments, desires, all is
hushed in that divine music. My soul is now as serene as deep and
silent water. A faith in something greater, in a future though unknown
destiny, beyond this life, a faith in eternity,--in short, an
all-absorbing larger aspiration, overwhelms that petty faith which we
might term personal, that faith in the morrow, that sort of goad that
spurs on irresolute minds, and that is so needful if one must struggle
and exist and accomplish something in this world."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, _vol._ II, pp. 222-229.]

This graceful musing, full in the original of those rich harmonies
that only the Spanish language can express, will serve sufficiently to
give an impression of the series as a whole. The broad but fervent
faith expressed in the last lines indicates a deeply religious and
somewhat mystical nature. This characteristic of Becquer may be
noticed frequently in his writings and no one who reads his works
attentively can call him elitist, as have some of his calumniators.

Beautiful as Becquer's prose may be considered, however, the universal
opinion is that his claim to lasting fame rests on his verse. Mrs.
Humphrey Ward, in her interesting article entitled "A Spanish
Romanticist,"[1] says of him: "His literary importance indeed is only
now beginning to be understood. Of Gustavo Becquer we may almost say
that in a generation of rhymers he alone was a poet; and now that his
work is all that remains to us of his brilliant and lovable
personality, he only, it seems to us, among the crowd of modern
Spanish versifiers, has any claim to a European audience or any chance
of living to posterity." This diatribe against the other poets of
contemporary Spain may seem to us unjust; but certain it is that
Becquer in the eyes of many surpasses either Nuñez de Arce or
Campoamor, with whom he forms "a triumvirate that directs and
condenses all the manifestations of contemporary Spanish lyrics."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _Macmillan's Magazine_, February, 1883, p. 307.]

  [Footnote 2: Blanco Garcia, _op. cit._, vol. II, p. 79.]

Becquer has none of the characteristics of the Andalusian. His lyrical
genius is not only at odds with that of Southern Spain, but also with
his own inclination for the plastic arts, says Blanco Garcia. "How
could a Seville poet, a lover of pictorial and sculptural marvels, so
withdraw from the outer form as to embrace the pure idea, with that
melancholy subjectivism as common in the gloomy regions bathed by the
Spree as it is unknown on the banks of the Darro and Guadalquivir?"[1]
The answer to the problem must be found in his lineage.

  [Footnote 1: _Ibid._, p. 80.]

In spite of the fascination early exercised by Julia Espin y Guillén
over the young poet, it may be doubted if she can fairly be said to
have been the muse of his _Rimas_. She doubtless inspired some of his
verse; but the poet seems to sing the praises or lament the cruelty of
various sweethearts. The late Don Juan Valera, who knew Gustavo well,
goes so far as to say: "I venture to suspect that none of these women
ever lived in the world which we all corporeally inhabit. When the
mind of the poet descended to this world, he had to struggle with so
much poverty, he saw himself engulfed and swallowed up by so many
trials, and he was obliged to busy himself with such prosaic matters
of mean and commonplace bread-winning, that he did not seek, nor would
he have found had he sought them, those elegant and semi-divine women
that made of him now a Romeo, now a Macías, now an Othello, and now a
Pen-arch.... To enjoy or suffer really from such loves and to become
ensnared therein with such rare women, Becquer lacked the time,
opportunity, health, and money.... His desire for love, like the arrow
of the Prince in one of the tales of the Arabian Nights, shot high
over all the actual _high-life_ and pierced the golden door of the
enchanted palaces and gardens of the Fairy Paribanú, who, enraptured
by him, took him for her spouse."[1] In fact Becquer, speaking of the
unreality of the numerous offspring of his imagination, says in the
Introduction to his works, written in June, 1868: "It costs me labor
to determine what things I have dreamed and what things have happened
to me. My affections are divided between the phantasms of my
imagination and real personalities. My memory confuses the names and
dates, of women and days that have died or passed away with the days
and women that have never existed save in my mind."[2]

  [Footnote 1: _Florilegio de Poesías Castellanas del Siglo XIX_, con
  introducción y notas, por Juan Valera. Madrid, 1902, vol. I, pp.
  186-188.]

  [Footnote 2: _Obras_, vol. I, p. L.]

Whatever may be one's opinion of the personality of the muse or muses
of his verse, the love that Becquer celebrates is not the love of
oriental song, "nor yet the brutal deification of woman represented in
the songs of the Provençal Troubadours, nor even the love that
inspired Herrera and Garcilaso. It is the fantastic love of the
northern ballads, timid and reposeful, full of melancholy tenderness,
that occupies itself in weeping and in seeking out itself rather than
in pouring itself forth on external objects."[1] In this matter of
lyrical subjectivism Becquer is unique, for it cannot be found in any
other of the Spanish poets except such mystic writers as San Juan de
la Cruz or Fray Luis de León.

  [Footnote 1: Blanco Garcia, _op. cit._, p. 83.]

In one of Becquer's most beautiful writings in prose, in a _Prológo_
to a collection of _Cantares_ by Augusto Ferran y Forniés, our author
describes two kinds of poetry that present themselves to one's choice:
"There is a poetry which is magnificent and sonorous, the offspring of
meditation and art, which adorns itself with all the pomp of language,
moves along with a cadenced majesty, speaks to the imagination,
perfects its images, and leads it at will through unknown paths,
beguiling with its harmony and beauty." "There is another poetry,
natural, rapid, terse, which springs from the soul as an electric
spark, which strikes our feelings with a word, and flees away. Bare of
artificiality, free within a free form, it awakens by the aid of one
kindred idea the thousand others that sleep in the bottomless ocean of
fancy. The first has an acknowledged value; it is the poetry of
everybody. The second lacks any absolute standard of measurement; it
takes the proportions of the imagination that it impresses; it may be
called the poetry of poets."[1]

  [Footnote 1: _Obras_, vol. III, pp. 112-113.]

In this description of the short, terse, and striking compositions of
his friend Ferran, Becquer has written likewise the apology for his
own verse. His was a poetry of "rapid, elemental impressions." He
strikes but one chord at a time on his lyre, but he leaves you
thrilled. This extreme simplicity and naturalness of expression may be
well illustrated by the refrain of the seventy-third poem:

  _¡Dios mío, qué solos
  Se quedan los muertos!_

His poetry has often been compared to that of Heine, whom he is said
to have imitated. Becquer did not in fact read German; but in _El
Museo Universal_, for which he was a collaborator, and in which he
published his _Rimas_, there appeared one of the first versions of the
_Intermezzo_,[1] and it is not unlikely that in imitation of the
_Intermezzo_ he was led to string his _Rimas_ like beads upon the
connecting thread of a common autobiographical theme. In the
seventy-six short poems that compose his _Rimas_, Becquer tells "a
swiftly-moving, passionate story of youth, love, treachery, despair,
and final submission." "The introductory poems are meant to represent
a stage of absorption in the beauty and complexity of the natural
world, during which the poet, conscious of his own high,
incommunicable gift, by which he sees into the life of things, is
conscious of an aimless fever and restlessness which is forever
turning delight into weariness."[2]

  [Footnote 1: Blanco Garcia, op. cit., p. 86.]

  [Footnote 2: Mrs. Ward, _loc. cit._, p. 316.]

Some of these poems are extremely beautiful, particularly the tenth.
They form a sort of prelude to the love-story itself, which begins in
our selections with the thirteenth. Not finding the realization of his
ideal in art, the poet turns to love. This passion reaches its
culminating point in the twenty-ninth selection, and with the
thirtieth misunderstanding, dissatisfaction, and sadness begin.
Despair assails him, interrupted with occasional notes of melancholy
resignation, such as are so exquisitely expressed in the fifty-third
poem, the best-known of all the poet's verse. With this poem the
love-story proper comes to a close, and "the melancholy, no doubt more
than half imaginary and poetical, of his love poems seems to broaden
out into a deeper sadness embracing life as a whole, and in which
disappointed passion is but one of the many elements."[1] "And,
lastly, regret and passion are alike hushed in the presence of that
voiceless love which shines on the face of the dead and before the
eternal and tranquil slumber of the grave."[2]

  [Footnote 1: Mrs. Ward, _loc. cit._, p.319.]

  [Footnote 2: _Ibid._, p. 316.]

Whatever Becquer may have owed to Heine, in form or substance, he was
no servile imitator. In fact, with the exception of the thirtieth, no
one of his _Rimas_ seems to be inspired directly by Heine's
_Intermezzo_. The distinguishing note in Heine's verse is sarcasm,
while that of Becquer's is pathos. Heine is the greater poet, Becquer,
the profounder artist. As Blanco Garcia well points out,[1] the moral
inclinations of the two poets were distinct and different also.
Becquer's instinct for the supernatural freed him from Heine's
skepticism and irreligion; and, though he had suffered much, he never
doubted Providence.

  [Footnote 1: op. _cit._, p.86.]

The influence of Alfred de Musset may be felt also in Becquer's
_Rimas_, particularly in the forty-second and forty-third; but in
general, the Spanish poet is "less worldly and less ardent"[1] than
the French.

  [Footnote 1: Corm, _op. cit._, p. xl.]

The _Rimas_ are written for the most part in assonanced verse. A
harmonious rhythm seems to be substituted for the music of the rhyme.
The meter, too, is very freely handled. Notwithstanding all this, the
melody of Becquer's verse is very sweet, and soon catches and charms
even the foreign ear. His _Rimas_ created a school like that inspired
by the _Doloras_ of Campoamor. But the extreme simplicity and
naturalness of Becquer's expression was difficult to reproduce without
falling into the commonplace, and his imitators have for the most part
failed.




AN UNPUBLISHED LETTER OF THE POET BECQUER, ONE OF THE FEW THAT HAVE
SURVIVED HIM, ADDRESSED TO SOR. C. FRANCO DE LA IGLESIAS, MINISTERIO
DE ULTRAMAR, MADRID. DATED IN TOLEDO, JULY 18TH, 1869.[1]

  [Footnote 1: The accentuation and punctuation of the original are
  preserved. This letter is of particular interest, showing, as it
  does, the tender solicitude of Becquer for his children, his dire
  financial straits when a loan of three or four dollars is a godsend,
  and his hesitation to call upon friends for aid even when in such
  difficulties. The letter was presented to the writer of this sketch
  by Don Francisco de Laiglesia, a distinguished Spanish writer and
  man of public life and an intimate friend of Becquer. Señor de
  Laiglesia is the owner of the magnificent portrait of Gustavo by
  Valeriano Becquer, of the beauty of which but a faint idea can be
  had from the copy of the etching by Maura, which serves as a
  frontispiece to the present volume.]


Mi muy querido amigo:

Me volvi de esa con el cuidado de los chicos y en efecto parecia
anunciarmelo apenas llegue cayó en cama el mas pequeño. Esto se
prolonga mas de lo que pensamos y he escrito á Gaspar y á Valera que
solo pagó la mitad del importe del cuadro Gaspar he sabido que salio
ayer para Aguas Buenas y tardará en recibir mi carta Valera espero
enviará ese pico pero suele gastar una calma desesperante en este
apuro recurro una vez mas á vd. y aunque me duele abusar tanto de su
amistad le ruego que si es posible me envie tres ó cuatro duros para
esperar el envio del dinero que aguardamos el cual es seguro pero no
sabemos que dia vendrá y aqui tenemos al medico en casa y atenciones
que no esperan un momento.

Adios estoy aburrido de ver que esto nunca cesa. Adios mande vd. á su
amigo que le quiere

  Gustavo Becquer


Espresiones á Pepe Marco S/c Calle de San Ildefonso Toledo. Si le es á
vd. posible enviar eso hagalo si puede en el mismo dia que reciba esta
carta por que el apuro es de momento.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


A list of the works consulted in the preparation of the sketch of
Becquer's life.


WORKS BY BECQUER

Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer. _Quinta edición aumentada con varias
poesías y leyendas. Madrid, Librería de Fernando Fé, 1898._ Three
volumes.

Historia de los Temples de España, _publicada bajo la protección de
SS. MM. AA. y muy reverendos señores arzobispos y obispos--dirigida
por D. Juan de la Puerto Vizcaino y D. Gustavo Adolfo Becquer. Tomo I,
Madrid, 1857. Imprenta y Estereotipia Española de los Señores Nieto y
Campañía._ Becquer is the author of only a portion of this work--see
Introduction, p. xx.

La Ilustración de Madrid, January 12-October 12, 1870, contains a
large number of articles by Becquer that have never been published in
book form. The same can be said of other periodicals for which Becquer
collaborated.


TRANSLATIONS

Gustave Becquer--Légendes espagnoles. _Traduction de Achille Fouquier,
dessins de S. Arcos. Paris, Librairie de Firmin-Didot et Cie, 1885_.
French.

Terrible Tales--Spanish. _W. W. Gibbings, London, W. C._ In this
collection the following seven out of the twelve tales that it
contains are by Becquer,--"The Golden Bracelet," "The Green Eyes,"
"The Passion Flower," "The White Doe," "Maese Pérez, the Organist,"
"The Moonbeam," and "The Mountain of Spirits." The translation is
often inaccurate.


WORKS OR ARTICLES ON BECQUER

P. Francisco Blanco Garcia. _La Literatura Española en el Siglo XIX,
parte segunda, Madrid, 1891_, contains a good criticism of the
literary work of Becquer, pp. 79-91, and pp. 274-277.

Narciso Campillo. _Gustavo Adolfo Becquer_ is the title of an
excellent article on the Seville poet, by one who knew him well, in
_La Ilustración Artística_, Barcelona, December 27, 1886, pp. 358-360.
This number (261--Año V) is dedicated to Becquer, and contains many
prose articles and much verse relative to him.

Achille Fouquier. _Gustave Becquer, Légendes Espagnoles. Traduction de
Achille Fouquier, dessins de S. Arcos. Paris, Firmin-Didot et Cie,
1885,--Avant-Propos_, pp. 1-19. An interesting sketch of Becquer's
life and an excellent appreciation of his style.

José Gestoso y Pérez. _Carta á Mr. Achille Fouquier_ is the title of a
valuable article in _La Ilustración Artistica_, Barcelona, December
27, 1886, pp. 363-366. This article contains important genealogical
matter regarding Becquer, which had not until that time been
published.

Eduardo de Lustono. Becquer is the titie of a sketch by this writer,
published in _Alrededor del Mundo_, No. 109, July 4, 1901, pp. 11-13,
and No. 110, July 11, 1901, pp. 22-23. It is largely a copy of the
article by Narciso Campillo, mentioned above, and of the following by
Rodriguez Correa.

Ramón Rodriguez Correa. _Prólogo de las Obras de Gustavo A. Becquer.
Quinta edición, Madrid, Fernando Fé, 1898_. Vol. I, pp. IX-XLV. This
is the principal biography of Becquer and the source of all the
others. Its author was Becquer's most intimate friend.

Juan Valera. In _Florilegio de Poesías Castellanas del Siglo XIX, Tomo
I, Madrid, Fernando Fé, 1902_, pp. 182-191, may be found an excellent
appreciation of the poet by one of the most capable of Spanish critics
and a personal friend of Becquer.

P. Restituto del Valle Ruiz, Agustino. In his _Estudios Literarios_,
pp. 104-116, there is a chapter devoted to Gustavo A. Becquer, which
contains an interesting critique of his poetry.

Mrs. (Mary A.) Humphrey Ward, in _Macmillan's Magazine_, No. 280,
February, 1883, pp. 305-320, has an article entitled "A Spanish
Romanticist: Gustavo Becquer." This is one of the best articles on
Becquer that have been published.



SPANISH PROSODY


The basis for the following remarks on Spanish prosody is, for the
most part, E. Benot's _Prosodia Castellana y Versification_, 3 vols.,
Madrid, 1892. Other works which have been consulted are the _Ortologia
y Arte Metrica_ of A. Bello, published in his _Obras Completas_, vol.
4, Madrid, 1890; Rengifo's _Arte Poètica Española_, Barcelona, 1759;
J. D. M. Ford's "Notes on Spanish Prosody," in _A Spanish Anthology_,
published by Silver, Burdett & Co., 1901; and a _Tratado de Literatura
Preceptiva_, by D. Saturnino Milego é Inglada, published at Toledo in
1887.

Spanish versification has nothing to do with the quantity of vowels
(whether long or short), which was the basis of Latin prosody.

There are four important elements in Spanish versification. Of these
four elements two are essential, and the other two are usually
present.

The essential elements, without which Spanish verse cannot exist,
are--

  I. A determined number of syllables per line.

  II. A rhythmic distribution of the accents in the line.

The additional elements usually present in Spanish poetical
compositions are--

  III. Caesural pauses.

  IV. Rhyme.


I. SYLLABIFICATION

Consonants.--In verse the same rules hold as in prose for the
distribution of consonants in syllables.

Vowels.--If there were but one vowel in a syllable, Spanish
syllabification would be easy; but sometimes two or more vowels are
found either between consonants, or at the beginning or at the end of
a word. When such is the case, intricacies arise, for sometimes the
contiguous vowels are pronounced in a single syllable and sometimes
they are divided into separate syllables.

The contiguous vowels may belong to a single word (see A); or they may
be the final vowel or vowels of one word and the initial vowel or
vowels of a following word or words (see B).

A. _Diphthongization_,--If two contiguous vowels of a single word are
pronounced in but one syllable they form a diphthong, e.g. _hu^esped_.

B. _Synalepha_.--If two or more contiguous vowels belonging to two or
more words are pronounced in a single syllable, they form synalepha.

  Ex. _Yo sé^un himno gigante y^extraño_, p. 164, I, l. 1.

Since Spanish verse depends upon a determined number of syllables per
line, _diphthongization_ and _synalepha_ are important factors in
versification.


A. DIPHTHONGIZATION

Mute _h_ between vowels is disregarded and does not prevent
diphthongization, e.g. _a^h^ora_, _re^h^usar_.

The separation of two vowels that are usually united in one syllable
is called _diaeresis_, e.g. _vi|oleta_.

The union in one syllable of two vowels that are usually in separate
syllables is called _synaeresis_, e.g. _ca^os_.

1. THE TWENTY-FIVE POSSIBLE COMBINATIONS OP VOWELS IN DIPHTHONGS

The vowels may be divided into strong vowels (a, e, o) and weak vowels
(i, u). For purposes of versification y as a vowel may be treated as
i. The five vowels (a, e, o, i, u) taken in pairs may form diphthongs
in twenty-five possible combinations, as follows:

a. Pairs of two weak vowels: ui, iu, ii, uu.

b. Pairs of two strong vowels:

  { ae, ao, aa,
  { ea, eo, ee,
  { oa, oe, oo.

c. Pairs of a strong vowel plus a weak vowel

  { ai, au,
  { ei, eu,
  { oi, ou.

d. Pairs of a weak vowel plus a strong vowel

  { ua, ue, uo,
  { ia, ie, io.

NOTE: In diphthongs a dominates o and e; and o dominates e. Any strong
vowel dominates a weak one.

  Ex. In Bo^abdíl, if a were not dominant, the diphthong would be
  dissolved.


2. DIPHTHONGS AND WORD ACCENTUATION

There are with regard to accent three possible conditions under which
two contiguous vowels may occur within a word.

a. The contiguous vowels may precede the accented syllable.

b. One of the contiguous vowels may be accented.

c. The contiguous vowels may come after the accented syllable.


a. Two contiguous vowels before the accent.

(1) Of the twenty-five possible combinations all are admissible in
diphthongs in a syllable preceding the accented syllable.

  Ex. _Habrá po^esta_, p. 165, IV, l. 4.

(a) Diaeresis may be employed to dissolve the diphthong.

  Ex. _Sobre una vi|oleta_, p. 169, XIII, l. 8.

b. One of two contiguous vowels accented.

(1) _When two contiguous vowel's are strong._

(a) There is no diphthong if one of two contiguous strong vowels
receives the accent.

  Ex. _Chispë|ando el sol hiere_, p. 173, XXVI I, l. 17.

  Ex. _Tú, sombra a|érea que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

By synaeresis, however, a diphthong may be formed, especially in the
combinations á^o, á^e, ó^e--_c^a^o^s, c^a^e, ro^e_. But in order to
diphthongize oa, ea, and eo, when the accent naturally falls on the
first vowel, the accent must shift to the second, which is a dominant
vowel. Such diphthongization is harsh. For example, _loa_ would shift
the accent from o to a in order to form a diphthong. The accent would
also shift in _cre^a, fe^o_.

(2) _When one of the contiguous vowels is weak and the other strong._

(a) There is no diphthong if an accented weak vowel precedes a strong.

  Ex. _Yo, que á tus ojos en mi agoní|a_, p. 171, XV, l. 18.
  Synaeresis is, however, sometimes employed to overcome this rule.
  The accent must then shift.

  Ex. _Habi^a llegado una nave._ Calderón.

(b) There is no diphthong if an accented weak vowel follows a strong.

  Ex. _¿Cómo puede re|ir?_ p. 182, XLIX, l. 4.

Synaeresis serves sometimes to overcome this rule. The result is
usually harsh.

  Ex. _En re^ir á costa ajena, les prepara._

(c) If an accented strong vowel precedes a weak, they form a
diphthong. The diphthong is rarely dissolved, and is usually marked
with a diaresis, if dissolution takes place.

  Ex. _Beso del aura, onda de luz_, p. 170, XV, l. 5.

(d) If an accented strong vowel follows a weak they may or may not
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Por una sonrisa, un ci^elo_, p. 172, XXIII, l. 2. [Diphthong.]

  Ex. _Domando el rebelde, mezquino idï|oma_, p. 164, I, l. 6. [No
  diphthong.]

Diaeresis or synaeresis may usually be employed according to the case.

Thus, _fiel_ becomes by diaeresis _fi|el_, and _br|ioso_ becomes by
synaeresis _bri^oso_.

It should be remembered that in some words the accentuation is
variable, while in others it is fixed.

There are two classes of words that have a variable accentuation:
first, those in which an unaccented weak vowel is followed by an
accented strong vowel, e.g. _majestu^oso_, _majestu|oso_; second,
those in which an accented strong vowel is followed by an unaccented
strong vowel, e.g. _tra|e, tra^e._

  Ex. _Cre^es que la afe|an_. Becquer.
     _Cre|es que suspirando pasa el viento_, p. 171, XVI, l. 3.

Etymological conditions often determine whether or not a diphthong is
formed.

ie and ue, derived from the Latin e and o respectively, form
indissoluble diphthongs.

The ending -ión for substantives is usually a diphthong and rarely
suffers dissolution.

Synaeresis may be employed to unite in a single syllable two
contiguous vowels (unaccented weak + accented strong) that are
separated on account of etymology, or, in the case of derivatives,
analogy with the original word; but diaeresis is employed very rarely
to dissolve a proper diphthongal combination (unaccented weak +
accented strong).

For example, _di|ario_ by analogy with _día_, and _fi|ó_ from the
Latin _fidavit_, have ordinarily the _i_ in separate syllables, but a
diphthong may be formed by synaeresis.

(3) _When the two contiguous vowels are weak_.

(a) Two contiguous weak vowels with the accent on the first form an
indissoluble diphthong, e.g. _mu^y_.

(b) Two contiguous weak vowels with the accent on the second may or
may not form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Si antes no juras que por ru^in falsía_. Hermosilla.
  [Diphthong.]

  Ex. _Con sus mil rü|idos_, p. 188, LXXIII, l. 19, [No diphthong.]

c. Two contiguous vowels after the accented syllable.

(1) Two contiguous strong vowels after the accented syllable naturally
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Tú, sombra aére^a que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

Diaeresis may be employed to dissolve the diphthong.

(2) If a strong vowel is followed by a weak vowel after the accented
syllable, they form a diphthong, e.g. _hablaba^is, amara^is_.

This diphthong is easily dissolved.

(3) If a weak vowel is followed by a strong vowel after the accented
syllable, they form a diphthong, e.g. _histor^i^a, ans^i^a_.

  Ex. _De la brisa nocturna al tenu^e soplo_, p. 192, LXXV, l. 6.

The diphthong may, however, be dissolved, e.g. _estatu|a, tenu|e,
nadi|e_.

3. TRIPHTHONGS AND COMBINATIONS OP THREE OR MORE CONTIGUOUS VOWELS

If three vowels belonging to the same word are contiguous, one of them
must be accented. There are then three possible arrangements.

(i) Three contiguous vowels of a word with the accent on the first,
e.g. _tráeos_.

(ii) Three contiguous vowels of a word with the accent on the second,
e.g. creia, _buey_.

(iii) Three contiguous vowels with the accent on the third, e.g.
_rehuí_.

Each of the above arrangements has two combinations of accented and
unaccented vowels to which the rules for diphthongs may be applied. In
(i) there will be a combination of two vowels with the first accented,
plus a combination of two vowels after the accent. In _tráeos_, for
example, the a and e would probably be in separate syllables by b (1)
(a), and eo would probably form a diphthong by c (1). _Tráeos_ would,
then, probably be a dissyllable.

In (ii) there will be a combination of two vowels with the accent an
the second, and one of two vowels with the accent on the first. In
creia, for example, the e and í would be in separate syllables by b
(2) (b), and the í and a would probably be in separate syllables also
by b (2)(a). Therefore, _creia_ would probably be a trisyllable. In
_cambiáos_ the i and á might form one syllable or two by b (2) (_d_),
and the á and o would probably be in separate syllables by b (1) (a).
Therefore, in _cambiáos_ the combination iáo might form a dissyllable
or a trisyllable.

In (iii) there will be a combination of two vowels before the accent,
and one of two vowels with the second accented. In _rehuí_, for
example, the e and u might be in the same syllable by a (1), or in
separate syllables by dieresis by a (1) (a), and the u and í might be
in separate syllables or not by b (3) (b). Therefore, _rehuí_ might be
a monosyllable, a dissyllable, or a trisyllable.

Other combinations of three vowels may be analyzed in a similar way,
as may also combinations of more than three vowels, e.g. _creíais_,
etc.


B. SYNALEPHA

Between the contiguous vowels of separate words there may occur
synalepha (which corresponds to diphthongization within a word), or
hiatus (which is similar to diaeresis within a word).

  Ex. _Abre^una^eternidad_, p. 178, XXXVI I, l. 22. _¿Á qué me lo
  decís? lo sé^:^es mudable_, p. 179, XXXIX, l. 1. [Synalepha.]

  Ex. _Como la onda^azul, en cuya cresta_, p. 173, XXVII, l. 16.
  [Hiatus.]

The vowels contracted by synalepha are each pronounced, except when
the same vowel is repeated, when only a prolonged sound is heard, as
in _onda^azul_ or _sé^es_ above.

Synalepha may join into a single syllable two, three, four, and even
five vowels. The union of two vowels (diphthongal synalepha) and the
union of three vowels (triphthongal synalepha) are the most common.

A pause due to a break in sense does not prevent synalepha. Mute h is
disregarded in the verse and does not prevent synalepha.

  Ex. _Capaz de encerrarlo, y apénas ¡oh^hermosa!_ p. 164, I, l. 10.



DIPHTHONGAL SYNALEPHA


Synalepha takes place between two contiguous unaccented vowels
belonging to separate words.

  Ex. _Abre^una^eternidad_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 22.

Synalepha occurs when the final vowel of the first word is accented.

  Ex. _Te ví^un punto, y, flotando ante mis ojos_, p. 169, XIV, l. 1.

Synalepha usually occurs when the initial vowel of the second word is
accented, especially when the first word ends in a weak vowel, and
also in the combinations aá, oá, oa, eá, eó, eé.

  Ex. _Me parece^en el cielo de la tarde_, p. 169, XIII, l. 11.

NOTE: Synalepha is possible with the other combinations, but hiatus is
preferable even with the above combinations, in a syllable on which
the rhythmical accent falls (see under Rhythmic Accent).

  Ex. _Despierta, hablas, y al hablar, vibrantes_, p. 174, XXVII, l.
  23.

  Ex. _Como la ola que á la playa_ viene, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 19.



TRIPHTHONGAL SYNALEPHA


There is always triphthongal synalepha when a is the middle vowel; or
when o or e is the middle vowel, except in the following combinations,
aoa, aoo, ooo, aea, aeo, oea, oeo.

  Ex. _Silenciosa á expirar_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 20.

There is never triphthongal synalepha when an accented weak vowel
stands between two strong vowels. Therefore the conjunctions y and ú
prevent triphthongal synalepha.

  Ex. _Y de purpura y oro la matiza_, p. 168, IX, l. 4.

There may be triphthongal synalepha when í (y) is the middle vowel, if
u precedes it, or i follows it.

  Ex. _Fuí diestro, fuí valiente, fuí arrogante_. Cervantes.

When u is the middle vowel there may be synalepha if i follows it. The
construction is very rare.

There is no synalepha with a word beginning with hue.

  Ex. _Mucho nuestro huesped tarda_. Tirso de Molina.

In the following cases the groups of vowels which would usually make
triphthongal synalepha are pronounced in two syllables:

(1) When the first word of the group ends in two vowels which do not
form a diphthong.

  Ex. _Que aún tení|a^abiertos_, p. 187, LXXIII, l. 2.

(2) When the two initial vowels of the second word do not form a
diphthong.

  Ex. _Tú, sombra^a|érea que, cuantas veces_, p. 170, XV, l. 7.

(3) When the first word ends in a diphthong and the second begins with
a vowel in a constituent syllable (i.e. a syllable on which the
rhythmical accent falls).

  Ex. _Tan gran designio honra tus audacias._

If the accented vowel is not in a constituent syllable synalepha may
occur.

  Ex. _Mientras la cencia á descubrir no alcance_, p. 165, IV, l. 13.

(4) When the first word ends in a single vowel, and the second word
begins with a diphthong in a constituent syllable.

  Ex. _Tú, proceloso austro que derribas_.

(3) and (4) might well be considered as cases of hiatus.



SYNALEPHA BETWEEN FOUR OR MORE VOWELS


This is less common, yet it exists.

  Ex. _No^h^a^y^amor donde no hay celos_. Lope de Vega.




HIATUS

Hiatus is most frequently found between words having a close
syntactical relation, particularly if the initial vowel of the second
word is in a constituent syllable. It may occur between the article
and its substantive, the possessive adjective and its substantive, a
preposition and its object, the negatives _no_ and _ni_ and a
following vowel; and after the conjunctions _y, que, si_, and other
words having a weak accent such as _desde, coma, todo, otro, cuando_,
etc.

Hiatus is most likely to occur when the accented vowel is the initial
vowel of the final word in a phrase or verse, or of a word that has a
strongly accented position in the verse; as, for example, when the
syllable is the next to the last syllable in a verse, or is the fourth
or eighth syllable of a hendecasyllabic verse of the second class.

  Ex. _Rumor de besos y batir de alas_, p. 168, X, l. 6.

  Ex. _Como la ola que á la playa viene_, p. 178, XXXVII, l. 19.

In the above-mentioned case, the phrase _de^oro_ is usually joined by
synalepha.

  Ex. _Mi frente es pálida, mis trenzas de^oro._ Becquer.

Hiatus is, however, sometimes observed in this phrase.

  Ex. _De plumas y de oro_, p. 180, XL, l. 28.

When both vowels are accented hiatus is more common than synalepha,
even though there is no close syntactical relation, although the
vowels may be joined by synalepha if they do not come in a constituent
syllable.

  Ex. _¡Oh yá isla católica patente!_ Herrera. [Hiatus.]

  Ex. _¿Sabes tú^á dónde va?_ p. 178, XXXVIII, l. 4. [Synalepha.]



II. RHYTHMIC ACCENT


The second essential element of Spanish verse is a rhythmic
distribution of accents within a line. Words have an accent of their
own and another stronger accent on account of their position in a
verse.

This extraordinary accentual stress, which strengthens periodically
certain naturally accented syllables of a verse, is known as _rhythmic
accent_. It plays somewhat the same rôle as did quantity in Latin
verse. All other accents and pauses in the verse are subservient to
the rhythmic accent.

Spanish verse being accentual, however, and not quantitative, the
terms used to determine the regular recurrence of long and short
syllables in Latin verse are not very applicable to it, and few
compositions are regular in the arrangement of the stress.


A. LATIN TERMS OF VERSIFICATION APPLIED TO SPANISH VERSE

As Latin terms of versification are sometimes applied to Spanish
verse, the following rules may be helpful.

A _trochaic_ octosyllabic line, for example, substituting stress for
quantity, would be scanned

  / -- | / -- | / -- | / --,

with the stress on the first, third, fifth, and seventh syllables.

_Iambic_ verse would have a regular alternation of unaccented and
accented syllables, -- / -- /, etc.

_Dactylic_ verse would have a regular recurrence of an accented
syllable followed by two unaccented syllables, etc.

  / -- -- | / -- -- |, etc.

_Amphibrachic_ verse would be formed by a regular recurrence of three
syllables of which the middle one would be stressed, -- / --. This
construction is sometimes followed in lines of twelve syllables (p.
164, I, 1. 2), and also in lines of six syllables (p. 167, VII, 1.-4).

_Anapestic_ verse consists of a regular recurrence of two unstressed
syllables preceding a stressed syllable, -- -- /. This is sometimes
found in ten-syllable lines (p. 164, I, 1. i).


B. SPANISH VERSE ENDINGS

An accented word is called _aguda_ when it has the accent on the last
syllable, e.g. _verdad, luz, yo_; _llana_ (or grave) when it has the
accent on the penult, e.g. _trabajo, fruto_; _esdrújula_ when it has
the accent on the antepenult, e.g. _límpido, pájaro, pórtico_.

A verse is called _agudo, llano_ (or grave), or _esdrújulo_ according
to whether its final word is _aguda, llana_ (or grave), or
_esdrújula_.

In a _verso agudo_ the last syllable counts for two syllables.
Therefore, _Ni tu ni yo jamás_, p. 177, XXXIII, l. 2, is a
heptasyllable.

In a _verso llano_ (grave) the number of syllables does not change.
Therefore, _Detrás del abanico_, p. 180, XL, l. 27, is a
heptasyllable.

In a _verso esdrújulo_, the intermediate syllable between the accented
syllable and the final syllable does not count, either in enumerating
the syllables in the verse or for the rhyme (assonance). Therefore,
_Umbrales de su pórtico_, p. 180, XL, l. 32, is a heptasyllable.


C. THE DISTRIBUTION OF RHYTHMIC ACCENTS

In verses of different length there are different rules with regard to
the distribution of accents, but the following general rules should be
observed.

Every verse must be accented upon the syllable nominally preceding the
final syllable.

NOTE: It should be borne in mind that the actual final syllable in a
versa _agudo_ counts as two syllables, and that the next to the last
actual syllable in a verso _esdrújulo_ does not count.

Besides the necessary accent on the next to the last syllable, all
verses of seven syllables or more must have other necessary accents,
which are determined by the number of syllables in the line.

The syllable directly preceding the one that has the rhythmical accent
should never be accented, for it obstructs the proper accentuation of
the constituent syllable. A syllable so accented is called
_obstruccionista_.


D. THE NUMBER OF SYLLABLES IN SPANISH VERSE

Spanish verse may consist of any number of syllables from two up to
sixteen. All must have an accent on the next to the last syllable.

_Dissyllabic Verse_: A dissyllabic verse may be composed of a single
word (either _aguda_, _llana_, or _esdrújula_).

  Ex. _¡Duerme!_ p. 173, XXVII, l. 13.

There can be no supernumerary accents.

_Trisyllabic Verse_: A verse of three syllables can have no
supernumerary accent, for the accent would be _obstruccionista_.

  Ex. _Suspira._

_Tetrasyllable Verse_: A verse of four syllables must have an accent
on the third syllable. There may or may not be a supernumerary accent
on the first.

  Ex. _De ese brío._

_Pentasyllabic Verse_: A verse of five syllables must have an accent
on the fourth. It may or may not have a supernumerary accent on the
first or second syllable.

  Ex. _Rumor sonóro_, p. I 70, XV, l. 3.

_Adonic verse_ is a pentasyllable with necessary accents on the first
and fourth syllables.

  Ex. _Céfiro blando_. Villegas.

_Hexasyllabic Verse_: A verse of six syllables must have an accent on
the fifth. There may or may not be supernumerary accents, but never on
the fourth syllable.

                       5
  Ex. _Y^entre^aquella sombra
        2         5
      Veíase^á^intérvalos
           3     5
      Dibujarse rígida
          2          5
      La forma del cuerpo_, p. 188, LXXIII, ll. 13-16.

_Heptasyllabic Verse_: A verse of seven syllables must have an accent
on the sixth, and at least one other necessary accent, which may be on
any syllable except the fifth.

       2               6
  Ex. _Su mano^entre mis manos,
          2           6
      Sus ojos en mis ojos_, p. 179, XL, ll. 1-2.

_Octosyllabic Verse_: A verse of eight syllables must have an accent
on the seventh, and at least one other accent, which may fall on any
syllable except the sixth.


         1        4       7
  Ex. _Hojas del árbol caídas
          2         5     7
      Juguetes al viento son._ Espronceda.

_Hendecasyllabic verse_: There are two classes of hendecasyllables.

_First Class_: Verses of eleven syllables which have the sixth
syllable and the tenth syllable stressed are hendecasyllables of the
first class.

  Ex. _Los invisibles 'átomos del 'aire_, p. 168, X, l. 1.

Hendecasyllables of the first class may have supernumerary accents on
other syllables, provided they do not fall upon the fifth or ninth.

  Ex. _Los sus'pires son 'aire, y van al 'aire.
      Las 'lágrimas son 'agua, y van al 'mar._ p. 178, XXXVIII, ll.
      1-2.

_Second Class_: Hendecasyllables of the second class are
eleven-syllable verses with the accent on the fourth, eighth, and
tenth syllables. There may be accents on other syllables, provided
that they be not _obstruccionistas_.

  Ex. _Olas gi'gantes qu^e^os rom'péis bra'mando,_ p. 183, LII, l. 1.

If it is difficult to classify a hendecasyllable because it has
accents on the fourth, sixth, eighth, and tenth syllables, one must
decide on the prominence of the accents from pauses, or from emphasis.
The hendecasyllable,

  _La vida es 'corta, 'sí; muy 'largo el 'arte,_

would belong to the first class on account of the emphasis of _sí_,
while the verse,

  _La vida es 'corta, 'corta; 'largo el 'arte,_

would belong to the second class on account of the pause after the
fourth and the emphasis on the eighth. The accent on the sixth is,
then, not constituent, but supernumerary.

All meters thus far have

Obligatory (constituent) accents.

Facultative (supernumerary) accents.

A necessary termination in a combination of an unaccented plus an
accented plus an unaccented syllable (-- / --). The dissyllable is the
only exception.

The facultative accent is opposed to the regular recurrence in each
line of dissyllabic and trisyllabic elements, which elements caused
the rhythm of Latin verse.

Spanish rhythm is a rhythm of series, of strophes, not a rhythm of
regularly recurring accents within a verse.

Verses of ten or twelve syllables, however, lend themselves more
readily to rhythm from regularly recurring stress.

_Decasyllabic Verse_: A verse of ten syllables may be formed by the
triple repetition of the trisyllable -- -- /. One extra unaccented
syllable is admissible when the verse is _llano_; and two when the
verse is _esdrújulo_.

Scheme:

  -- -- / -- -- / -- -- ,        _agudo_.
  -- -- / -- -- , -- -- , --     _llano_.
  -- -- / -- -- / -- -- / -- --  _esdrújulo_.

_Dodecasyllable Verse_: A verse of twelve syllables, with
the stress on the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh syllables,
makes a dodecasyllable of amphibrachs. This dodecasyllable
has a short metrical pause after the sixth syllable, and a longer
one after the twelfth.

Scheme:

  -- / -- -- / -- || -- / -- -- /      _agudo_.
  -- / -- -- / -- || -- / -- -- / --    _llano_.
  -- / -- -- /      -- / -- -- / -- --  _esdrújulo_.

Verses of different length do not readily intermingle. There are some
measures, however, which are used much together.

Verses of eleven syllables are used with those of seven or of five
syllables.

Verses of eight syllables are used with those of four syllables.

Verses of ten syllables are used with those of twelve (p. 164, I); and
also with those of six (p. 167, VII). These meters lend themselves to
regularly recurring stress more readily than any others.




III. CAESURAL PAUSES


The caesura is an important, though not essential, element in Spanish
verse. In verses of eleven or twelve syllables, however, the caesura
is usually employed to give a break in a determined place. The caesura
requires a strong accent on the syllable preceding it, and does not
prevent synalepha.

  Ex. _Si al resonar confus|o^á tus espaldas_, p. 171, XVI, l. 7.

  Ex. _Sabe que, ocul|to^entre las verdes hojas_, p. 171, XVI, l.5.

The disposition of the caesural pauses determines the harmony of the
versification, and usually varies with the accents so as to avoid
monotony in the verse.



IV. RHYME


N.B. For purposes of Rhyme, words may be divided into two classes:

_First_, words ending in a vowel.

Second, words ending in a consonant.

Rhymes are called feminine, if the rhyme words end in a vowel.

Rhymes are called masculine, if the rhyme words end in a consonant.

NOTE: Final s and final n, especially in the plural of nouns and in
verbs, do not count. Therefore, _penas_ and _arenas_ would form a
feminine rhyme.

There are two kinds of rhyme: Consonance and Assonance.


A. CONSONANCE

_Consonantal rhyme_ is one in which all the letters, vowels and
consonants, are the same from the accented syllable to the end of the
word, e.g. _bruma--espuma_; _flor--amor_.

In consonantal rhyme both consonants and vowels should agree exactly
(_sonante--errante_); b and v can, however, rhyme together, since they
represent the same sound, e.g. _estaba--esclava_; _haba--clava_.

The following are a few general rules for consonantal rhyme.

A word should not rhyme with itself. Sometimes, however, a simple word
rhymes with a derivative (_menor--pormenor_) or two derivatives with
each other (_menosprecio--desprecio_).

The tenses of verbs which end in -aba, -ando, -áis, -éis; the present
and past participles of regular verbs; adverbs with the termination
-mente; verbal nouns ending in -miento, -ción, and other similar
endings,--should not rhyme together.

Words similar in sound and form but distinct in meaning may rhyme.

  _son_ ('sound')--_son_ ('are')

If an unaccented weak vowel (i, u) precedes or follows a strong vowel
in the same syllable of a word, it is absorbed by the strong vowel,
and does not count in the rhyme. Therefore, _vuelo_ and _cielo_ rhyme;
also _muestra_ and _diestra_.


B. ASSONANCE

When the vowels from the accented syllable to the end of the word are
the same, but the consonants are different, the rhyme is called
assonance. Therefore, _inflaman_ and _pasa_ assonate in á-a; _negros_
and _creo_ in e-o.

In words accented on the last syllable (_agudas_), the assonance is
that of the last syllable only, e.g. _perdón--espiró_; _azul--tú_.

In words accented on the antepenult (_esdrújulas_) or on a preceding
syllable, only the accented syllable and the final syllable count for
purposes of assonance. Therefore, _fábula_ and _lágrimas_ assonate in
á-a; _trémulo_ and _vértigo_ assonate in é-o.

Words accented on the last syllable (_agudas_) cannot assonate with
words accented on the penult (_llanas_), or with those accented on the
antepenult (_esdrújulas_) or upon any preceding syllable.

In words _llanas_ or _esdrújulas_ the assonance is of two vowels only.
In diphthongs the accented vowel only is considered if the diphthong
occur in an accented syllable. Therefore, _verte_ and _duermes_
assonate in e-e; _baile_ and _parte_ assonate in a-e.

Words _llanas_ may assonate with words accented on the antepenult
(_esdrújulas_). Therefore, _pórtico_ and _olmos_ assonate in ó-o.

For purposes of assonance little use is made of words accented on a
syllable preceding the antepenult.

In a final accented or unaccented syllable u and i are absorbed, for
purposes of assonance, by a preceding or following a, o, or e.
Therefore, _sabia_ and _gratia_ assonate in á-a; _igual_ and _mar_
assonate in a, _pleita_ and _pliega_ assonate in é-a.

If in assonance a weak vowel is united in a diphthong with a strong
vowel, the assonance is called _compound assonance_, e.g.
_guarda--fatua_.

Assonance between two single vowels is called _simple assonance_, e.g.
_sangre--trae_.

This distinction is of little value, however, for verses in simple and
compound assonance alternate constantly.

In the case of two strong vowels forming a diphthong after an accented
syllable, the following rules apply.

a in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding or
succeeding o in the same syllable. Therefore, _Astárloa_ and _Dánao_
assonate in á-a.

a in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding or
following e in the same syllable. Therefore, _corpórea_ and _rósea_
assonate in ó-a.

o in a final unaccented syllable predominates over a preceding e in
the same syllable. Therefore, _óleo_ and _erróneo_ assonate in ó-o;
but o in a final unaccented syllable is dominated by a following e in
the same syllable, and the e counts in the assonance. Therefore,
_héroe_ and _veces_ assonate in é-e.

When two weak vowels (i, u) are united in a diphthong, the second
predominates. Thus _triunfo_ and _chulo_ assonate in ú-o; _cuido_ and
_bendito_ assonate in i-o.

There are twenty possible assonances in Spanish: á, ó, é, i, ú, á-a,
á-e, á-o, é-a, é-e, é-o, ó-a, ó-e, ó-o, i-a, i-e, i-o, ú-a, ú-e, ú-o.

Words that have in the final unaccented syllable i or u, not in
diphthongs, are considered for purposes of assonance as if ending in e
or o respectively. Therefore, _fácil_ and _nave_ assonate in á-e;
_espíritu_ and _líquido_, in i-o.

If ai occurs in a syllable after an a in the accented syllable, the i
rather than the a of the diphthong counts in the assonance. Therefore,
_cantares_ and _trocabais_ assonate in á-e. If the accented vowel is
not a, the a of ai counts in the assonance. Therefore, _Vicenta_ and
_quisierais_ assonate in é-a.

Consonantal rhyme should not be introduced in compositions written in
assonance. This rule is not always observed (see pp. 183-184, LIII).

The assonance of alternate lines (the even numbers) is the rule in
modern Spanish. If the composition is short the same assonance may be
kept throughout.

Blank Verse.--Verses which lack both consonantal rhyme and assonance
occur in Spanish, and are called _versos sueltos_ (or _libres_).
Compositions in blank verse are, however, extremely difficult to write
in Spanish, and are therefore comparatively rare.


STROPHES

The strophe is frequently of arbitrary length, yet when the poet has
once fixed the measure of his strophe he is supposed to preserve the
same measure throughout. The following are some of the strophic
arrangements in Spanish.

_Pareados_ are pairs of contiguous verses of the same number of
syllables, which rhyme[1] together in pairs.

  [Footnote 1: By _rhyme_ hereafter shall be understood _consonantal_
  rhyme, unless otherwise indicated.]

_Tercetos_ are a series of strophes, in the first of which the first
verse rhymes with the third, and, from the second strophe on, the
first and third verse of each successive strophe rhyme with the middle
verse of the preceding strophe. This form of verse is known in Italian
as _terza rima_. The composition ends with a _serventesio_ (see
below), of which the first and third verses rhyme with the middle
verse of the preceding strophe. The rhyme-scheme, then, would be a b
a, b c b, c d c, etc., d e d e.

_Cuartetas_, properly so called, are strophes of four eight-syllable
verses, of which the second verse rhymes (or is in assonance) with the
fourth. _Cuarteta_ is likewise a general name given to strophes of
four verses.

_Serventesios_ are strophes of four hendecasyllables, of which the
first rhymes or assonates with the third, and the second with the
fourth.

_Redondillas_ are strophes of four eight-syllable (or sometimes
six-syllable) verses which rhyme as follows: a b b a.

_Cuartetos_ are strophes of four hendecasyllables with the
rhyme-scheme a b b a. It is not customary to put a final word that is
_aguda_ in the uneven verses of compositions written in
hendecasyllables, or in verses that rhyme with them. Sometimes the
four verses are esdrújulos.

_Romances_, which are the most used of all forms, need not be written
in _cuartetas_. It is sufficient that the even verses be in assonance
and the uneven verses free. Romances, properly so called, are composed
of octosyllabic verses.

_Romancillos_ are romances composed of verses with less than eight
syllables.

_Romances heróicos_ are romances composed of hendecasyllabic verses,
all of which are _llanos_.

_Quintillas_ are combinations of five verses that have but two rhymes,
of which one occurs three times and the other twice. These verses may
rhyme at the will of the poet, provided that three verses having the
same rhyme do not follow each other successively. Of the possible
arrangements the following occur most frequently: a a b b a, a b b a
a, a b a b a, a b a b b.

_Sextinas_ are usually composed of six hendecasyllabic verses in which
a _serventesio_ is followed by a _pareado_.

The first, third, and fifth verses, however, may rhyme together, and
the second, fourth, and sixth.

There are also _sextinas_ which have the third and sixth verses with a
consonantal rhyme in words that are _agudas_, while the first and
second, and the fourth and fifth, form _pareados_.

In compositions written in _sextinas_ the succeeding strophes have the
same arrangement as the first.

Octavas:

_Octavas de Arte mayor_ are composed of eight dodecasyllables divided
into two equal hemistichs, with the accents on the second, fifth,
seventh, and eleventh syllables. The first verse rhymes with the
fourth, fifth, and eighth; the second with the third; and the sixth
with the seventh. Sometimes the second rhymes with the fourth, the
fifth with the eighth, the first with the third, the sixth with the
seventh.

_Octavas reales_ are strophes of eight hendecasyllabic verses
(_llanos_), of which the first six rhyme alternately and the last two
form a _pareado_.

When _octavas_ of this form have eight-syllable verses or less, they
are called _octavillas_.

_Octavas_ and _Octavillas Italianas_:

There are four variants, but all must have the fourth and eighth
verses _agudos_.

_First variant_: There is no _verso libre_, and the rhyme-scheme is a
b b c a d d c.

_Second variant_: The first and fifth verses are _libres_ and the
others rhyme 1 b b c 5 d d c. This form is the most used of all.

_Third variant_: All the verses are _libres_ except the fourth and
eighth.

_Fourth variant_: The rhymes have some other arrangement than those
mentioned in the three preceding cases.

_Décimas_ are strophes of ten octosyllabic verses with the
rhyme-scheme a b b a a c c d d c.

Thus far all the compositions treated have been strophes, of which all
the lines have the same number of syllables.

The most common strophes having an unequal number of syllables in the
component verses are as follows:

_Endechas reales_ are _cuartetas_ in which three heptasyllables are
followed by a hendecasyllable. The even verses are usually in
assonance, although the verses may have the rhyme-scheme a b a b.

The _Lira_ is a strophe of five verses, of which the first, third, and
fourth are heptasyllables, and the second and fifth are
hendecasyllables. The rhyme-scheme is a b a b b.

_Seguidillas_ are strophes composed of seven verses, three of which
are heptasyllables and four pentasyllables. The first, third, and
sixth verses are _libres_, the second and fourth have the same
assonance, and the fifth and seventh another distinct assonance.

_Silvas_ are series of strophes composed of hendecasyllables and
heptasyllables of unequal number and unevenly distributed with a free
arrangement of rhymes. Every verse should rhyme with another, yet
sometimes a verse is left unrhymed in long compositions.

The _Sonnet_ is taken from the Italian and has the same general forms.
It is written in hendecasyllables, and is always divided into four
parts--two quatrains and two tercets.

_Versos sueltos_ (blank verse) are verses which do not assonate with
the other contiguous verses, or with the nearest words in which the
sense demands a pause.

There are many other and very artificial forms that exist, but their
treatment would be irrelevant here. During the nineteenth century the
caprice of the poet invented many new forms of which the arrangement
is evident at a glance.

In closing, it should be said that this study of Spanish prosody,
which is primarily intended as an aid to the reading of Becquer's
poetry contained in this volume, is necessarily too brief to be
exhaustive, and many things are purposely omitted, as, for example,
certain unusual forms of verse such as the nine-syllable verse or that
of more than twelve syllables. Wherever it has been found convenient,
references have been made to Becquer's poems to illustrate points of
versification.




LEGENDS, TALES, AND POEMS
BY BECQUER



DESDE MI CELDA


(_Cartas Literarias_)


CARTA SEXTA

Queridos amigos: Hará cosa de dos à tres años, tal vez leerían[1]
ustedes en los periódicos de Zaragoza[2] la relación de un crimen que
tuvo lugar en uno de los pueblecillos de estos contornos. Tratábase
del asesinato de una pobre vieja á quien sus convecinos acusaban de
bruja. Últimamente, y por una coincidencia extraíia, he tenido ocasión
de conocer los detalles y la historia circunstanciada de un hecho que
se comprende apenas en mitad de un siglo tan despreocupado como el
nuestro.[3]

  [Footnote 1: leerían ustedes = 'you may have read.']

  [Footnote 2: Zaragoza = 'Saragossa.' A Spanish city of some 99,000
  inhabitants, capital of the province of the same name, situated on
  the Ebro river at its junction with the Huerva. It is famous for its
  two cathedrals, _El Pilar_ and La Seo, and for its obstinate and
  heroic resistance at the time of the siege by the French in 1808.]

  [Footnote 3: The belief in witchcraft is still prevalent in some
  quarters, and as late as 1863 a man was drowned at Hedingham, in
  Essex, Eng., for being a wizard, his accusers and persecutors being
  village tradesmen. See Brewer, _Dictionary of Miracles_, Phila.,
  Lippincott & Co., 1884, p. 345.]

Ya estaba para acabar el día. El cielo, que desde el amanecer se
mantuvo cubierto y nebuloso, comenzaba á obscurecerse á medida que el
sol, que antes transparentaba su luz á través de las nieblas, iba
debilitándose, cuando, con la esperanza de ver su famoso castillo como
término y remate de mi artística expedición, dejé á Litago[1] para
encaminarme á Trasmoz,[2] pueblo del que me separaba una distancia de
tres cuartos de hora por el camino más corto. Como de costumbre, y
exponiéndome, á trueque de examinar á mi gusto los parajes más ásperos
y accidentados, á las fatigas y la incomodidad de perder el camino por
entre aquellas zarzas y peñascales, tomé el más difícil, el más dudoso
y más largo, y lo perdí en efecto, á pesar de las minuciosas
instrucciones de que me pertreché á la salida del lugar.

  [Footnote 1: Litago. A small village of some 600 inhabitants,
  situated in the province of Saragossa on the northern slope of the
  Moncayo (see p. 8, note 1) to the west of the river Huecha, not far
  from Alcalá de Moncayo.]

  [Footnote 2: Trasmoz. A small village of some 300 inhabitants,
  situated in the province of Saragossa near the Moncayo and not far
  from the river Huecha. It contains an ancient castle. See p. 13,
  note 1.]

Ya enzarzado en lo más espeso y fragoso del monte, llevando del
diestro la caballería por entre sendas casi impracticables, ora por
las cumbres para descubrir la salida del laberinto, ora por las
honduras con la idea de cortar terreno, anduve vagando al azar un buen
espacio de tarde hasta que por último, en el fondo de una cortadura
tropecé con un pastor, el cual abrevaba su ganado en el riachuelo que,
después de deslizarse sobre un cauce de piedras de mil colores, salta
y se retuerce allí con un ruido particular que se oye á gran
distancia, en medio del profundo silencio de la naturaleza que en
aquel punto y á aquella hora parece muda ó dormida.

Pregunté al pastor el camino del pueblo, el cual según mis cuentas no
debía distar mucho del sitio en que nos encontrábamos, pues aunque sin
senda fija, yo había procurado adelantar siempre en la dirección que
me habían indicado. Satisfizo el buen hombre mi pregunta lo mejor que
pudo, y ya me disponía á proseguir mi azarosa jornada, subiendo con
pies y manos y tirando de la caballería como Dios me daba á entender,
por entre unos pedruscos erizados de matorrales y puntas, cuando el
pastor que me veía subir desde lejos, me dió una gran voz
advirtiéndome que no tomara la _senda de la tía Casca_, si quería
llegar sano y salvo á la cumbre. La verdad era que el camino, que
equivocadamente había tornado, se hacía cada vez más áspero y difícil
y que por una parte la sombra que ya arrojaban las altísimas rocas,
que parecían suspendidas sobre mi cabeza, y por otro el ruido
vertiginoso del agua que corría profunda á mis pies, y de la que
comenzaba á elevarse una niebla inquieta y azul, que se extendía por
la cortadura borrando los objetos y los colores, parecían contribuir á
turbar la vista y conmover el ánimo con una sensación de penoso
malestar que vulgarmente podría llamarse preludio de miedo. Volví pies
atrás, bajé de nuevo hasta donde se encontraba el pastor, y mientras
seguíamos juntos por una trocha que se dirigía al pueblo, adonde
también iba á pasar la noche mi improvisado guía, no pude menos de
preguntarle con alguna insistencia, por qué, aparte de las
dificultades que ofrecía el ascenso, era tan peligroso subir á la
cumbre por la senda que llamo de la tía Casca.

--Porque antes de terminar la senda, me dijo con el tono más natural
del mundo, tendríais que costear el precipicio á que cayó la maldita
bruja que le da su nombre, y en el cual se cuenta que anda penando el
alma que, después de dejar el cuerpo, ni Dios ni el diablo han querido
para suya.

--¡Hola! exclamé entonces como sorprendido, aunque, á decir verdad, ya
me esperaba una contestación de esta ó parecida clase. Y ¿en qué
diantres se entretiene el alma de esa pobre vieja por estos
andurriales?

--En acosar y perseguir á los infelices pastores que se arriesgan por
esa parte de monte, ya haciendo ruido entre las matas, como si fuese
un lobo, ya dando quejidos lastimeros como de criatura, ó
acurrucándose en las quiebras de las rocas que están en el fondo del
precipicio, desde donde llama con su mano amarilla y seca á los que
van por el borde, les clava la mirada de sus ojos de buho, y cuando el
vértigo comienza á desvanecer su cabeza, da un gran salto, se les
agarra á los pies y pugna hasta despeñarlos en la sima.... ¡Ah,
maldita bruja! exclamó después de un momento el pastor tendiendo el
puño crispado hacia las rocas como amenazándola; ¡ah! maldita bruja,
muchas hiciste en vida, y ni aun muerta hemos logrado que nos dejes en
paz; pero, no haya cuidado, que á tí y tu endiablada raza de
hechiceras os hemos de aplastar una á una como á víboras.

--Por lo que veo, insistí, después que hubo concluído su extravagante
imprecación, está usted muy al corriente de las fechorías de esa
mujer. Por ventura, ¿alcanzó usted á conocerla? Porque no me parece de
tanta edad como para haber vivido en el tiempo en que las brujas
andaban todavía por el mundo.

Al oir estas palabras el pastor, que caminaba delante de mí para
mostrarme la senda, se detuvo un poco, y fijando en los míos sus
asombrados ojos, como para conocer si me burlaba, exclamó con un
acento de buena fe pasmosa:--¡Que no le parezco á usted de edad
bastante para haberla conocido! Pues ¿y si yo le dijera que no hace
aún tres años cabales que con estos mismos ojos que se ha de comer la
tierra, la ví caer por lo alto de ese derrumbadero, dejando en cada
uno de los peñascos y de las zarzas un jirón de vestido ó de carne,
hasta que llegó al fondo donde se quedó aplastada como un sapo que se
coge debajo del pie?

--Entonces, respondí asombrado á mi vez de la credulidad de aquel
pobre hombre, daré crédito á lo que usted dice, sin objetar palabra;
aunque á mí se me había figurado, añadí recalcando estas últimas
frases para ver el efecto que le hacían, que todo eso de las brujas y
los hechizos no eran sino antiguas y absurdas patrañas de las aldeas.

--Eso dicen los señores de la ciudad, porque á ellos no les molestan;
y fundados en que todo es puro cuento, echaron á presidio á algunos
infelices que nos hicieron un bien de caridad á la gente del
Somontano,[1] despeñando á esa mala mujer.

  [Footnote 1: la gente del Somontano = 'the people of the Slope,'
  those living near the foot of the Moncayo mountain.]

--¿Conque no cayó casualmente ella, sino que la hicieron rodar, que
quieras que no? ¡Á ver á ver! Cuénteme usted como pasó eso, porque
debe ser curioso, añadí, mostrando toda la credulidad y el asombro
suficiente, para que el buen hombre no maliciase que sólo quería
distraerme un rato, oyendo sus sandeces; pues es de advertir que hasta
que no me refirió los pormenores del suceso, no hice memoria de que,
en efecto, yo había leído en los periódicos de provincia una cosa
semejante. El pastor, convencido por las muestras de interés con que
me disponía á escuchar su relate, de que yo no era uno de esos señores
_de la ciudad_, dispuesto á tratar de majaderías su historia, levantó
la mano en dirección á uno de los picachos de la cumbre, y comenzó
así, señalándome una de las rocas que se destacaba obscura é imponente
sobre el fondo gris del cielo, que el sol, al ponerse tras las nubes,
teñía de algunos cambiantes rojizos.

--¿Ve usted aquel cabezo alto, alto, que parece cortado á pico, y por
entre cuyas penas crecen las aliagas y los zarzales? Me parece que
sucedió ayer. Yo estaba algunos doscientos pasos camino atrás de donde
nos encontramos en este momento: próximamente sería[1] la misma hora,
cuando creí escuchar unos alaridos distantes, y llantos é
imprecaciones que se entremezclaban con voces varoniles y coléricas
que ya se oían por un lado, ya por otro, como de pastores que
persiguen un lobo por entre los zarzales. El sol, según digo, estaba
al ponerse, y por detrás de la altura se descubría un jirón del cielo,
rojo y encendido como la grana, sobre el que ví aparecer alta, seca y
haraposa, semejante á un esqueleto que se escapa de su fosa, envuelto
aún en los jirones del sudario, una vieja horrible, en la que conocí á
la tía Casca. La tía Casca era famosa en todos estos contornos, y me
bastó distinguir sus greñas blancuzcas que se enredaban alrededor de
su frente como culebras, sus formas extravagantes, su cuerpo encorvado
y sus brazos disformes, que se destacaban angulosos y obscuros sobre
el fondo de fuego del horizonte, para reconocer en ella á la bruja de
Trasmoz. Al llegar ésta al borde del precipicio, se detuvo un instante
sin saber qué partido tomar. Las voces de los que parecían perseguirla
sonaban cada vez más cerca, y de cuando en cuando la veía hacer una
contorsión, encogerse ó dar un brinco para evitar los cantazos que le
arrojaban. Sin duda no traía el bote de sus endiablados untos, porque,
á traerlo, seguro que habría atravesado al vuelo la cortadura, dejando
á sus perseguidores burlados y jadeantes como lebreles que pierden la
pista. ¡Dios no lo quiso así, permitiendo que de una vez pagará todas
sus maldades!... Llegaron los mozos que venían en su seguimiento, y la
cumbre se coronó de gentes, éstos con piedras en las manos, aquellos
con garrotes, los de más allá con cuchillos. Entonces comenzó una cosa
horrible. La vieja, ¡maldita hipocritona! viéndose sin huida, se
arrojó al suelo, se arrastró por la tierra besando los pies de los
unos, abrazándose á las rodillas de los otros, implorando en su ayuda
á la Virgen y á los Santos, cuyos nombres sonaban en su condenada boca
como una blasfemia. Pero los mozos, así hacían caso de sus lamentos
como yo de la lluvia cuando estoy bajo techado.--Yo soy una pobre
vieja que no he hecho daño á nadie: no tengo hijos ni parientes que me
vengan á amparar; ¡perdonadme, tened compasión de mí! aullaba la
bruja; y uno de los mozos, que con la una mano la había asido de las
greñas, mientras tenía en la otra la navaja que procuraba abrir con
los dientes, la contestaba rugiendo de cólera: ¡Ah, bruja de Lucifer,
ya es tarde para lamentaciones, ya te conocemos todos!--¡Tú hiciste
un mal á mi mulo, que desde entonces no quiso probar bocado, y murió
de hambre dejándome en la miseria! decia uno.--¡Tú has hecho mal de
ojo á mi hijo, y lo sacas de la cuna y lo azotas por las noches!
añadia el otro; y cada cual exclamaba por su lado: ¡Tú has echado una
suerte á mi hermana! ¡Tú has ligado á mi novia! ¡Tú has emponzoñado la
hierba! ¡Tú has embrujado al pueblo entero![2]

  [Footnote 1: sería = ' it must have been,']

  [Footnote 2: Accusations commonly made against those deemed guilty
  of witchcraft.]

Yo permanecía inmóvil en el mismo punto en que me había sorprendido
aquel clamoreo infernal, y no acertaba á mover pie ni mano, pendiente
del resultado de aquella lucha.

La voz de la tía Casca, aguda y estridente, dominaba el tumulto de
todas las otras voces que se reunían para acusarla, dándole en el
rostro con sus delitos, y siempre gimiendo, siempre sollozando, seguía
poniendo á Dios y á los santos Patronos del lugar por testigos de su
inocencia.

Por último, viendo perdida toda esperanza, pidió como última merced
que la dejasen un instante implorar del cielo, antes de morir, el
perdón de sus culpas, y de rodillas al borde de la cortadura como
estaba, la vieja inclinó la cabeza, juntó las manos y comenzó á
murmurar entre dientes qué sé yo qué imprecaciones ininteligibles:
palabras que yo no podía oir por la distancia que me separaba de ella,
pero que ni los mismos que estaban á su lado lograron entender; Unos
aseguran que hablaba en latín, otros que en una lengua salvaje y
desconocida, no faltando quien pudo comprender que en efecto rezaba,
aunque diciendo las oraciones al revés, como es costumbre de estas
malas mujeres.

En este punto se detuvo el pastor un memento, tendió á su alrededor
una mirada, y prosiguió así:

--¿Siente usted este profundo silencio que reina en todo el monte, que
no suena un guijarro, que no se mueve una hoja, que el aire está
inmóvil y pesa sobre los hombros y parece que aplasta? ¿Ve usted esos
jirones de niebla obscura que se deslizan poco á poco á lo largo de la
inmensa pendiente del Moncayo,[1] como si sus cavidades no bastaran á
contenerlos? ¿Los ve usted como se adelantan mudos y con lentitud,
como una legión aérea que se mueve por un impulse invisible? El mismo
silencio de muerte había entonces, el mismo aspecto extraño y temeroso
ofrecía la niebla de la tarde, arremolinada en las lejanas cumbres,
todo el tiempo que duró aquella suspensión angustiosa. Yo lo confieso
con toda franqueza: llegué á tener miedo. ¿Quién sabía si la bruja
aprovechaba aquellos instantes para hacer uno de esos terribles
conjuros que sacan á los muertos de sus sepulturas, estremecen el
fondo de los abismos y traen á la superficie de la tierra, obedientes
á sus imprecaciones, hasta á los más rebeldes espíritus infernales? La
vieja rezaba; rezaba sin parar; los mozos permanecían en tanto
inmóviles cual si estuviesen encadenados por un sortilegio, y las
nieblas obscuras seguían avanzando y envolviendo las peñas, en
derredor de las cuales fingían mil figuras extrañas como de mónstruos
deformes, cocodrilos rojos y negros, bultos colosales de mujeres
envueltas en paños blancos, y listas largas de vapor que, heridas por
la última luz del crepúsculo, semejaban inmensas serpientes de
colores.

  [Footnote 1: El Moncayo. A mountain of some 7600 feet in height
  situated near the boundaries of the provinces of Soria and
  Saragossa, to the west of the town of Borja and to the south of
  Tarazona. The panorama presented to the view from its summit is most
  extensive. To the south can be seen vaguely the Sierra de
  Guadarrama, to the southeast the mountains of Teruel, to the east
  the plain of the Ebro, to the north and northeast the Pyrenees and
  to the west the summits of the Cantabrian range. The rivers Queiles,
  Huecha, and others of less importance have their source in the
  Moncayo. It is the ancient Mons _Caunus_, celebrated in history for
  the defeat of the Celtiberians in the time of the consul Tiberius
  Sempronius Gracchus (governor of Hither Spain from 181 to 178
  B.C.).]

Fija la mirada en aquel fantástico ejercito de nubes que parecían
correr al asalto de la peña sobre cuyo pico íba á morir la bruja, yo
estaba esperando por instantes cuando se abrían sus senos para abortar
á la diabólica multitud de espíritus malignos, comenzando una lucha
horrible al borde del derrumbadero, entre los que estaban allí para
hacer justicia en la bruja y los demonios que, en pago de sus muchos
servicios, vinieran á ayudarla en aquel amargo trance.

--Y por fin, exclamé interrumpiendo el animado cuento de mi
interlocutor, é impaciente ya por conocer el desenlace, ¿en qué acabó
todo ello? ¿Mataron á la vieja? Porque yo creo que por muchos conjures
que recitara la bruja y muchas señales que usted viese en las nubes, y
en cuanto le rodeaba, los espíritus malignos se mantendrían[1]
quietecitos cada cual en su águjero; sin mezclarse para nada en las
cosas de la tierra. ¿No fué así?

  [Footnote 1: se mantendrían = 'must have remained,' 'probably
  remained.']

--Así fué, en efecto. Bien porque en su turbación la bruja no acertara
con la fórmula, ó, lo que yo más creo, por ser viernes, día en que
murió Nuestro Señor Jesucristo, y no haber acabado aún las vísperas,
durante las que los malos no tienen poder alguno, ello es que, viendo
que no concluía nunca con su endiablada monserga, un mozo la dijo que
acabase y levantando en alto el cuchillo, se dispuso á herirla. La
vieja entonces, tan humilde, tan hipocritona, hasta aquel punto, se
puso de pie con un movimiento tan rápido como el de una culebra
enroscada á la que se pisa y despliega[1] sus anillos irguiéndose
llena de cólera.--¡Oh! no; ¡no quiero morir, no quiero morir! decía;
¡dejadme, ú os morderó las manos con que me sujetáis!... Pero aún no
había pronunciado estas palabras, abalanzándose á sus perseguidores,
fuera de sí, con las greñas sueltas, los ojos inyectados en sangre, y
la hedionda boca entreabierta y llena de espuma, cuando la oí arrojar
un alarido espantoso, llevarse por dos ó tres veces las manos al
costado con grande precipitación, mirárselas y volvérselas á mirar
maquinalmente, y por último, dando tres ó cuatro pasos vacilantes como
si estuviese borracha, la ví caer al derrumbadero. Uno de los mozos á
quien la bruja hechizó una hermana, la más hermosa, la más buena del
lugar, la había herido de muerte en el momento en que sintió que le
clavaba en el brazo sus dientes negros y puntiagudos. ¿Pero cree usted
que acabó ahí la cosa? Nada menos que eso: la vieja de Lucifer tenía
siete vidas como los gatos.[2] Cayó por un derrumbadero donde
cualquiera otro á quien se le resbalase un pie no pararía hasta lo más
hondo, y ella, sin embargo, tal vez porque el diablo le quitó el golpe
ó porque los harapos de las sayas la enredaron en los zarzales, quedó
suspendida de uno de los picos que erizan la cortadura, barajándose y
retorciéndose allí como un reptil colgado por la cola, ¡Dios, como
blasfemaba! ¡Qué imprecaciones tan horribles salían de su boca! Se
estremecían las carnes y se ponían de punta los cabellos sólo de
oirla.... Los mozos seguían desde lo alto todas sus grotescas
evoluciones, esperando el instante en que se desgarraría el último
jirón de la saya á que estaba sujeta, y rodaría dando tumbos, de pico
en pico, hasta el fondo del barranco; pero ella con el ansia de la
muerte y sin cesar de proferir, ora horribles blasfemias, ora palabras
santas mezcladas de maldiciones, se enroscaba en derredor de los
matorrales; sus dedos largos, huesosos y sangrientos, se agarraban
como tenazas á las hendiduras de las rocas, de modo que ayudándose de
las rodillas, de los dientes, de los pies y de las manos, quizás
hubiese conseguido subir hasta el horde, si algunos de los que la
contemplaban y que llegaron á temerlo así, no hubiesen levantado en
alto una piedra gruesa, con la que le dieron tal cantazo en el pecho,
que piedra y bruja bajaron á la vez saltando de escalón en escalón por
entre aquellas puntas calcáreas, afiladas como cuchillos, hasta dar,
por último, en ese arroyo que se ve en lo más profundo del valle....
Una vez allí, la bruja permaneció un largo rato inmóvil, con la cara
hundida entre el légamo y el fango del arroyo que corría enrojecido
con la sangre; después, poco á poco, comenzó como á volver en sí y á
agitarse convulsivamente. El agua cenagosa y sangrienta saltaba en
derredor batida por sus manos, que de vez en cuando se levantaban en
el aire crispadas y horribles, no sé si implorando piedad, ó
amenazando aún en las últimas ansias.... Así estuvo algún tiempo
removiéndose y queriendo inútilmente sacar la cabeza fuera de la
corriente buscando un poco de aire, hasta que al fin se desplomó
muerta; muerta del todo, pues los que la habíamos visto caer y
conocíamos de lo que es capaz una hechicera tan astuta como la tía
Casca, no apartamos de ella los ojos hasta que completamente entrada
la noche, la obscuridad nos impidió distinguirla, y en todo este
tiempo no movió pie ni mano; de modo que si la herida y los golpes no
fueron bastantes á acabarla, es seguro que se ahogo en el riachuelo
cuyas aguas tantas veces había embrujado en vida para hacer morir
nuestras reses. ¡Quien en mal anda, en mal acaba! exclamamos después
de mirar una última vez al fondo obscuro del despeñadero; y
santiguándonos santamente y pidiendo á Dios nos ayudase en todas las
ocasiones, como en aquélla, contra el diablo y los suyos, emprendimos
con bastante despacio la vuelta al pueblo, en cuya desvencijada torre
las campanas llamaban á la oración á los vecinos devotos.

  [Footnote 1: á la que se pisa y despliega. Loose construction, in
  which the relative pronoun object of the first verb is understood as
  subject of the second.]

  [Footnote 2: The cat is credited in our colloquial English
  expression with two more lives.]

Cuando el pastor terminó su relato, llegábamos precisamente á la
cumbre más cercana al pueblo, desde donde se ofreció á mi vista el
castillo obscuro é imponente con su alta torre del homenaje, de la que
sólo queda en pie un lienzo de muro con dos saeteras, que
transparentaban la luz y parecian los ojos de un fantasma. En aquel
castillo, que tiene por cimiento la pizarra negra de que está formado
el monte, y cuyas vetustas murallas, hechas de pedruscos enormes,
parecen obras de titanes, es fama que las brujas de los contornos
tienen sus nocturnes conciliábulos.

La noche habiá cerrado ya, sombriá y nebulosa. La luna se dejaba ver á
intervalos por entre los jirones de las nubes que volaban en derredor
nuestro, rozando casi con la tierra, y las campanas de Trasmoz[1]
dejaban oir lentamente el toque de oraciones, como el final de la
horrible historia que me acababan de referir.

  [Footnote 1: Trasmoz. See p. 2, note 2.]

Ahora que estoy en mi celda tranquilo, escribiendo para ustedes la
relación de estas impresiones extrañas, no puedo menos de maravillarme
y dolerme de que las viejas supersticiones tengan todavía tan hondas
raíces entre las gentes de las aldeas, que den lugar á sucesos
semejantes; pero, ¿por qué no he de confesarlo? sonándome aún las
últimas palabras de aquella temerosa relación, teniendo junto á mi á
aquel hombre que tan de buena fe imploraba la protección divina para
llevar á cabo crímenes espantosos, viendo á mis pies el abismo negro y
profundo en donde se revolvía el agua entre las tinieblas, imitando
gemidos y lamentos, y en lontananza el castillo tradicional,[1]
coronado de almenas obscuras, que parecían fantasmas asomadas á los
muros, sentí una impresión angustiosa, mis cabellos se erizaron
involuntariamente, y la razón, dominada por la fantasía, á la que todo
ayudaba, el sitio, la hora y el silencio de la noche, vaciló un punto,
y casi creí que las absurdas consejas de las brujerías y los
maleficios pudieran ser posibles.

  [Footnote 1: tradicional = 'legendary.' Legend says that this castle
  was built in a night by a magician to satisfy the whim of one of the
  early kings. Becquer tells the story of its construction in _Carta
  séptima_.]




LOS OJOS VERDES


Hace mucho tiempo que tenía ganas de escribir cualquier cosa con este
título.

Hoy, que se me ha presentado ocasión, lo he puesto con letras grandes
en la primera cuartilla de papel, y luego he dejado á capriclio volar
la pluma.

Yo creo que he visto unos ojos como los que he pintado en esta
leyenda. No sé si en sueños, pero yo los he visto. De seguro no los
podré describir tales cuales ellos eran, luminosos, transparentes como
las gotas de la lluvia que se resbalan sobre las hojas de los árboles
después de una tempestad de verano. De todos modos, cuento con la
imaginación de mis lectores para hacerme comprender en este que
pudiéramos llamar boceto de un cuadro que pintaré algún dia.


I

--Herido va el ciervo, herido va; no hay duda. Se ve el rastro de la
sangre entre las zarzas del monte, y al saltar uno de esos lentiscos
han flaqueado sus piernas.... Nuestro joven señor comienza por donde
otros acaban ... en cuarenta años de montero no he visto mejor
golpe.... ¡Pero por San Saturio,[1] patrón de Soria![2] cortadle el
paso por esas carrascas, azuzad los perros, soplad en esas trompas
hasta echar los hígados, y hundidle á los corceles una cuarta de
hierro en los ijares: ¿no véis que se dirige hacia la fuente de los
Álamos,[3] y si la salva antes de morir podemos darle por perdido?

  [Footnote 1: San Saturio. Saint Saturius was born, according to
  Tamayo, in 493. In 532 he withdrew from the world into a cave at the
  foot of a mountain bathed by the river Duero, near where now stands
  the town of Soria. There he lived about thirty-six years, or until
  568, when he died and was buried by his faithful disciple St.
  Prudentius, later bishop of Tarazona, who had been a companion of
  the hermit during the last seven years of his life. His cave is
  still an object of pilgrimage, and a church has been built on the
  spot to the memory of the saint. See Florez, _España_ Sagrada,
  Madrid, 1766, tomo vii, pp. 293-294.]

  [Footnote 2: Soria. A mediaeval-looking town of 7296 inhabitants
  situated on a bleak plateau on the right bank of the Duero. It is
  the capital of a province of the same name. The old town of Numantia
  (captured by the Romans under P. Cornelius Scipio AEmilianus, 133
  B.C.) lay about three miles to the north of the present site of
  Soria.]

  [Footnote 3: Álamos. The choice of a grove of poplars as setting to
  the enchanted fount is peculiarly appropriate, as this tree belongs
  to the large list of those believed to have magical properties. In
  the south of Europe the poplar seems to have held sometimes the
  mythological place reserved in the north for the birch, and the
  people of Andalusia believe that the poplar is the most ancient of
  trees. (See de Gubernatis, Za _Mythologie des plantes_, Paris,
  Reinwald, 1882, p. 285.) In classical superstition the black poplar
  was consecrated to the goddess Proserpine, and the white poplar to
  Hercules. "The White Poplar was also dedicated to Time, because its
  leaves were constantly in motion, and, being dark on one side and
  light on the other, they were emblematic of night and day.... There
  is a tradition that the Cross of Christ was made of the wood of the
  White Poplar, and throughout Christendom there is a belief that the
  tree trembles and shivers mystically in sympathy with the ancestral
  tree which became accursed.... Mrs. Hemans, in her 'Wood Walk,' thus
  alludes to one of these old traditions:

    FATHER.--Hast thou heard, my boy,
      The peasant's legend of that quivering tree?

    CHILD.--No, father; doth he say the fairies dance
      Amidst its branches?

    FATHER.--Oh! a cause more deep,
      More solemn far, the rustic doth assign
      To the strange restlessness of those wan leaves.
      The Cross he deems--the blessed Cross, whereon
      The meek Redeemer bow'd His head to death--
      Was formed of Aspen wood; and since that hour
      Through all its race the pale tree hath sent down
      A thrilling consciousness, a secret awe
      Making them tremulous, when not a breeze
      Disturbs the airy Thistle-down, or shakes
      The light lines from the shining gossamer."

  Richard Folkard, _Plant Lore_, London, 1892, p. 503.]

Las cuencas del Moncayo[1] repitieron de eco en eco el bramido de las
trompas, el latir de la jauría desencadenada y las voces de los pajes
resonaron con nueva furia, y el confuso tropel de hombres, caballos y
perros se dirigió al punto que Iñigo, el montero mayor de los
marqueses de Almenar,[2] señalara,[3] como el más á propósito para
cortarle el paso á la res.

  [Footnote 1: El Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: Marqueses de Almenar. A title taken doubtless from the
  little town of Almenar (650 inhabitants) situated in the province of
  Soria near the right bank of the Rituerto river, southwest of the
  Moncayo, and not far from that mountain.]

  [Footnote 3: señalara. A relic of the Latin pluperfect (in _-aram_,
  _-eram_), popularly confounded with the imperfect subjunctive. Its
  use is now somewhat archaic, and is restricted to relative clauses.
  See Ramsey's _Spanish Grammar_, H. Holt & Co., 1902, § 944.]

Pero todo fué inútil. Cuando el más ágil de los lebreles llegó á las
carrascas jadeante y cubiertas las fauces de espuma, ya el ciervo,
rápido como una saeta, las había salvado de un solo brinco,
perdiéndose entre los matorrales de una trocha, que conducía á la
fuente.

--¡Alto!... ¡Alto todo el mundo! gritó Iñigo entonces; estaba de Dios
que había de marcharse.

Y la cabalgata se detuvo, y enmudecieron las trompas, y los lebreles
dejaron refunfuñando la pista á la voz de los cazadores.

En aquel momento se reunía á la comitiva el héroe de la fiesta,
Fernando de Argensola,[1] el primogénito de Almenar.

  [Footnote 1: Argensola. A name familiar to students of Spanish
  literature from the writings of the illustrious brothers Bartolomé
  and Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola (sixteenth century). It is also
  the name of a small town of some 560 inhabitants in the province of
  Barcelona.]

--¿Qué haces? exclamó dirigiéndose á su montero, y en tanto, ya se
pintaba el asombro en sus facciones, ya ardía la cólera en sus ojos.
¿Qué haces, imbécil? ¡Ves que la pieza está herida, que es la primera
que cae por mi mano, y abandonas el rastro y la dejas perder para que
vaya á morir en el fondo del bosque! ¿Crees acaso que he venido á
matar ciervos para festines de lobos?

--Señor, murmuró, Iñigo entre dientes, es imposible pasar de este
punto.

--¡Imposible! ¿y por qué?

--Porque esa trocha, prosiguió el montero, conduce á la fuente de los
Alamos; la fuente de los Álamos, en cuyas aguas habita un espíritu del
mal. El que osa enturbiar su corriente, paga caro su atrevimiento. Ya
la res habrá salvado sus márgenes; ¿como la salvaréis vos sin atraer
sobre vuestra cabeza alguna calamidad horrible? Los cazadores somos
reyes del Moncayo, pero reyes que pagan un tributo. Pieza que se
refugia en esa fuente misteriosa, pieza perdida.

--¡Pieza perdida! Primero perderé yo el señorío de mis padres, y
primero perderé el ánima en manos de Satanás, que permitir que se me
escape ese ciervo, el único que ha herido mi venablo, la primicia de
mis excursiones de cazador.... ¿Lo ves?... ¿lo ves?... Aún se
distingue á intervalos desde aquí ... las piernas le faltan, su
carrera se acorta; déjame... déjame... suelta esa brida, o te revuelco
en el polvo.... ¿Quién sabe si no le daré lugar para que llegue á la
fuente? y si llegase, al diablo ella, su limpidez y sus habitadores.
¡Sus! ¡_Relámpago_! sus, caballo mío! si lo alcanzas, mando engarzar
los diamantes de mi joyel en tu serreta de oro.

Caballo y jinete partieron como un huracán.

Iñigo los siguió con la vista hasta que se perdieron en la maleza;
después volvió los ojos en derredor suyo; todos, como el, permanecían
inmóviles y consternados.

El montero exclamó al fin:

--Señores, vosotros lo habéis visto; me he expuesto á morir entre los
pies de su caballo por detenerle. Yo he cumplido con mi deber. Con el
diablo no sirven valentías. Hasta aquí llega el montero con su
ballesta; de aquí adelante, que pruebe á pasar el capellán con su
hisopo.[1]

  [Footnote 1: hisopo = 'aspergillum.' A brash or metallic instrument
  for the sprinkling of holy water. As to the efficacy of holy water
  against evil spirits St. Teresa of Avila (1515-1582) speaks as
  follows:

  I have learned from frequent experience that there is nothing better
  (than holy water) to drive them away and to prevent them from
  returning: they flee at the sight of the Cross, but return. The
  virtue of holy water must be great indeed.

  See _Escritos de Santa Teresa_, "Libro de su vida," capítulo 31, in
  the _Biblioteca de Autores Españoles_, Madrid, Rivadeneyra, 1861, p.
  94.

  L'Abbé Jean Joseph Gaume has written a work, entitled _l'Eau lénite
  au XIXe siècle_ (Paris, 1866), in which he also advocates the use of
  holy water to-day for similar purposes.]


II

--Tenéis la color quebrada; andáis mustio, y sombrío; ¿qué os sucede?
Desde el día, que yo siempre tendré por funesto, en que llegásteis á
la fuente de los Álamos en pos de la res herida, diríase que una mala
bruja os ha encanijado con sus hechizos.

Ya no vais á los montes precedido de la ruidosa jauría, ni el clamor
de vuestras trompas despierta sus ecos. Sólo con esas cavilaciones que
os persiguen, todas las mañanas tomáis la ballesta para enderezaros á
la espesura y permanecer en ella hasta que el sol se esconde. Y cuando
la noche obscurece y voivéis pálido y fatigado al castillo, en balde
busco en la bandolera los despojos de la caza. ¿Qué os ocupa tan
largas horas lejos de los que más os quieren?

Mientras Iñigo hablaba, Fernando, absorto en sus ideas, sacaba
maquinalmente astillas de su escaño de ébano con el cuchillo de monte.

Después de un largo silencio, que solo interrumpia el chirrido de la
hoja al resbalarse sobre la pulimentada madera, el joven exclamó
dirigiéndose á su servidor, como si no hubiera escuchado una sola de
sus palabras:

--Iñigo, tú que eres viejo, tú que conoces todas las guaridas del
Moncayo, que has vivido en sus faldas persiguiendo á las fieras, y en
tus errantes excursiones de cazador subiste más de una vez á su
cumbre, dime, ¿has encontrado por acaso una mujer que vive entre sus
rocas?

--¡Una mujer! exclamó el montero con asombro y mirándole de hito en
hito.

--Sí, dijo el joven; es una cosa extraña lo que me sucede, muy
extraña.... Creí poder guardar ese secreto eternamente, pero no es ya
posible; rebosa en mi corazón y asoma á mi semblante. Voy, pues, á
revelártelo.... Tú me ayudarás á desvanecer el misterio que envuelve á
esa criatura, que al parecer solo para mí existe, pues nadie la
conoce, ni la ha visto, ni puede darme razón de ella.

El montero, sin despegar los labios, arrastró su banquillo hasta
colocarlo junto al escaño de su señor, del que no apartaba un punto
los espantados ojos. Éste, después de coordinar sus ideas, prosiguió
así:

--Desde el día en que á pesar de tus funestas predicciones llegué á la
fuente de los Álamos, y atravesando sus aguas recobré el ciervo que
vuestra superstición hubiera dejado huir, se llenó mi alma del deseo
de la soledad.

Tú no conoces aquel sitio. Mira, la fuente brota escondida en el seno
de una peña, y cae resbalándose gota á gota por entre las verdes y
flotantes hojas de las plantas que crecen al borde de su cuna.
Aquellas gotas que al desprenderse brillan como puntos de oro y suenan
como las notas de un instrumento, se reunen entre los céspedes, y
susurrando, susurrando con un ruido semejante al de las abejas que
zumban en torno de las flores, se alejan por entre las arenas, y
forman un cauce, y luchan con los obstáculos que se oponen á su
camino, y se repliegan sobre sí mismas, y saltan, y huyen, y corren,
unas veces con risa, otras con suspires, hasta caer en un lago. En el
lago caen con un rumor indescriptible. Lamentos, palabras, nombres,
cantares, yo no sé lo que he oído en aquel rumor cuando me he sentado
solo y febril sobre el peñasco, á cuyos pies saltan las aguas de la
fuente misteriosa para estancarse en una balsa profunda, cuya inmóvil
superficie apenas riza el viento de la tarde.

Todo es allí grande. La soledad con sus mil rumores desconocidos, vive
en aquellos lugares y embriaga el espíritu en su inefable melancolía.
En las plateadas hojas de los álamos, en los huecos de las peñas, en
las ondas del agua, parece que nos hablan los invisibles espíritus de
la naturaleza, que reconocen un hermano en el inmortal espíritu del
hombre.

Cuando al despuntar la mañana me veías tomar la ballesta y dirigirme
al monte, no fué nunca para perderme entre sus matorrales en pos de la
caza, no; iba á sentarme al borde de la fuente, á buscar en sus ondas
... no sé qué, ¡una locura! El día en que salté sobre ella con mi
_Relámpago_[1] creí haber visto brillar en su fondo una cosa extraña
... muy extraña ... los ojos de una mujer.

  [Footnote 1: Relámpago. The name of his horse, mentioned p. 17.]

Tal vez sería un rayo de sol que serpeó fugitive entre su espuma; tal
vez una de esas flores que flotan entre las algas de su seno, y cuyos
cálices parecen esmeraldas ... no sé: yo creí ver una mirada que se
clavó en la mía; una mirada que encendió en mi pecho un deseo absurdo,
irrealizable: el de encontrar una persona con unos ojos como aquellos.

En su busca fuí un día y otro á aquel sitio:

Por último, una tarde ... yo me creí juguete de un sueño ... pero no,
es verdad, la[1] he hablado ya muchas veces, como te hablo á tí ahora
... una tarde encontré sentada en mi puesto, y vestida con unas ropas
que llegaban hasta las aguas y flotaban sobre su haz, una mujer
hermosa sobre toda ponderación. Sus cabellos eran como el oro; sus
pestañas brillaban como hilos de luz, y entre las pestañas volteaban
inquietas unas pupilas que yo había visto... sí; porque los ojos de
aquella mujer eran los ojos que yo tenía clavados en la mente; unos
ojos de un color imposible; unos ojos ...

  [Footnote 1: la. The Spanish Academy condemns the use of _la_
  instead of _le_ as a feminine dative. Spanish writers, however,
  frequently so employ it.]

--¡Verdes! exclamó Iñigo con un acento de profundo terror, é
incorporándose de un salto en su asiento.

Fernando le miró á su vez como asombrado de que concluyese lo que iba
á decir, y le pregunto con una mezcla de ansiedad y de alegría:

--¿La conoces?

--¡Oh, no! dijo el montero. ¡Líbreme Dios de conocerla! Pero mis
padres, al prohibirme llegar hasta esos lugares, me dijeron mil veces
que el espíritu, trasgo, demonio ó mujer que habita en sus aguas,
tiene los ojos de ese color. Yo os conjuro, por lo que más améis en la
tierra, á no volver á la fuente de los Álamos. Un día ú otro-os
alcanzará su venganza, y expiaréis, muriendo, el delito de haber
encenagado sus ondas.

--¡Por los que más amo!... murmuró el joven con una triste sonrisa.

--¡Sí!, prosiguió el anciano; por vuestros padres, por vuestros
deudos, por las lágrimas de la que el cielo destina para vuestra
esposa, por las de un servidor que os ha visto nacer ...

--¿Sabes tú lo que más amo en este mundo? Sabes tú por qué daría yo el
amor de mi padre, los besos de la que me dió la vida, y todo el cariño
que pueden atesorar todas las mujeres de la tierra? Por una mirada,
por una sola mirada de esos ojos ... ¡Cómo podré yo dejar de
buscarlos!

Dijo Fernando estas palabras con tal acento, que la lágrima que
temblaba en los párpados de Iñigo se resbaló silenciosa por su
mejilla, mientras exclamó con acento sombrío: ¡Cúmplase la voluntad
del cielo!


III

--¿Quién eres tú? ¿Cuál es tu patria? ¿En dónde habitas? Yo vengo un
día y otro en tu busca, y ni veo el corcel que te trae á estos
lugares, ni á los servidores que conducen tu litera. Rompe de una vez
el misterioso velo en que te envuelves como en una noche profunda, yo
te amo, y, noble ó villana, seré tuyo, tuyo siempre....

El sol había traspuesto la cumbre del monte; las sombras bajaban á
grandes pasos, por su falda; la brisa gemía entre los álamos de la
fuente, y la niebla, elevándose poco á poco de la superficie del lago,
comenzaba á envolver las rocas de su margen.

Sobre una de estas rocas, sobre una que parecía próxima á desplomarse
en el fondo de las aguas, en cuya superficie se retrataba temblando el
primogénito de Almenar, de rodillas á los pies de su misteriosa
amante, procuraba en vano arrancarle el secreto de su existencia.

Ella era hermosa, hermosa y pálida, como una estatua de alabastro. Uno
de sus rizos caía sobre sus hombros, deslizándose entre los pliegues
del velo como un rayo de sol que atraviesa las nubes, y en el cerco de
sus pestañas rubias brillaban sus pupilas como dos esmeraldas sujetas
en una joya de oro.

Cuando el joven acabó de hablarle, sus labios se removieron como para
pronunciar algunas palabras, pero sólo exhalaron un suspiro, un
suspiro débil, doliente, como el de la ligera onda que empuja una
brisa al morir entre los juncos.

--¡No me respondes! exclamó Fernando al ver burlada su esperanza;
¿querrás que dé crédito á lo que de tí me han dicho? ¡Oh! No....
Háblame: yo quiero saber si me amas; yo quiero saber si puedo amarte,
si eres una mujer...

--Ó un demonio.... ¿Y si lo fuese?

El joven vacilo un instante; un sudor frió corrió por sus miembros;
sus pupilas se dilataron al fijarse con más intensidad en las de
aquella mujer, y fascinado por su brillo fosfórico, demente casí,
exclamó en un arrebato de amor:

--Si lo fueses ... fe amaría ... te amaría como te amo ahora, como es
mi destino amarte, hasta más allá de esta vida, si hay algo más allá
de ella.

--Fernando, dijo la hermosa entonces con una voz semejante á una
música: yo te amo más aún que tu me amas; yo, que desciendo hasta un
mortal, siendo un espíritu puro. No soy una mujer como las que existen
en la tierra; soy una mujer digna de tí, que eres superior á los demás
hombres. Yo vivo en el fondo de estas aguas; incorpórea como ellas,
fugaz y trasparente, hablo con sus rumores y ondulo con sus pliegues.
Yo no castigo al que osa turbar la fuente donde moro; antes le premio
con mi amor ... como á un mortal superior á las supersticiones del
vulgo, como á un amante capaz de comprender mi cariño extraño y
misterioso.

Mientras ella hablaba así, el joven, absorto en la contemplación de su
fantástica hermosura, atraído como por una fuerza desconocida, se
aproximaba más y más al borde de la roca. La mujer de los ojos verdes
prosiguió así:

--¿Ves, ves el limpido fondo de ese lago, ves esas plantas de largas y
verdes hojas que se agitan en su fondo?... Ellas nos darán un lecho de
esmeraldas y corales ... y yo ... yo te daré una felicidad sin nombre,
esa felicidad que has soñado en tus horas de delirio, y que no puede
ofrecerte nadie.... Ven, la niebla del lago flota sobre nuestras
frentes como un pabellón de lino ... las ondas nos llaman con sus
voces incomprensibles, el viento empieza entre los álamos sus himnos
de amor; ven ... ven ...

La noche comenzaba á extender sus sombras, la luna rielaba en la
superficie del lago, la niebla se arremolinaba al soplo del aire, y
los ojos verdes brillaban en la obscuridad como los fuegos fatuos que
corren sobre el haz de las aguas infectas.... Ven ... ven ... estas
palabras zumbaban en los oídos de Fernando como un conjuro. Ven ... y
la mujer misteriosa le llamaba al borde del abismo, donde estaba
suspendida, y parecía ofrecerle un beso ... un beso ...

Fernando dió un paso hacia ella ... otro ... y sintió unos brazos
delgados y flexibles que se liaban á su cuello, y una sensación fría
en sus labios ardorosos, un beso de nieve ... y vaciló ... y perdió
pie, y cayó al agua con un rumor sordo y lúgubre.

Las aguas saltaron en chispas de luz, y se cerraron sobre su cuerpo, y
sus círculos de plata fueron ensanchándose, ensanchándose hasta
expirar[1] en las orillas.[2]

  [Footnote 1: expirar. Becquer uses incorrectly the form _espirar_.]

  [Footnote 2: "It was a maxim both in ancient India and ancient
  Greece not to look at one's reflection in water.... They feared that
  the water-spirits would drag the person's reflection or soul under
  water, leaving him soulless to die. This was probably the origin of
  the classical story of Narcissus.... The same ancient belief
  lingers, in a faded form, in the English superstition that whoever
  sees a water-fairy must pine and die.

    'Alas, the moon should ever beam
    To show what man should never see!--
    I saw a maiden on a stream,
    And fair was she!

    I staid to watch, a little space,
    Her parted lips if she would sing;
    The waters closed above her face
    With many a ring.

    I know my life will fade away,
    I know that I must vainly pine,
    For I am made of mortal clay.
    But she's divine!'"

  Fraser, _The Golden Bough_, London, Macmillan & Co., 1900, vol. i,
  pp. 293-294. The object of Fernando's love was evidently an undine
  (see p. 43, note 1, and p. 47, note 1).]



LA CORZA BLANCA


I

En un pequeño lugar[1] de Aragón,[1] y allá por los años de mil
trescientos y pico, vivía retirado en su torre señorial un famoso
caballero llamado don Dionís, el cual, después de haber servido á su
rey[3] en la guerra contra infieles, descansaba á la sazón, entregado
al alegre ejercicio de la caza, de las rudas fatigas de los combates.

  [Footnote 1: un pequeño lugar. Veratón, a feudal town in the
  neighborhood of the Moncayo (see p. 8, note 1). Population (1900),
  484.]

  [Footnote 2: Aragón. "An ancient kingdom, now a captaincy-general of
  Spain, capital Saragossa, bounded by France on the north, by
  Catalonia on the east, by Valencia on the south, and by New Castile,
  Old Castile, and Navarre on the west, comprising the provinces of
  Huesca, Saragossa, and Teruel. It is traversed by mountains and
  intersected by the Ebro. During the middle ages it was one of the
  two chief Christian powers in the peninsula. In 1035 it became a
  kingdom; was united to Catalonia in 1137; rose to great influence
  through its acquisitions in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
  of Valencia, the Balearic Islands, Sardinia, and the Sicilies; and
  was united with Castile in 1479 through the marriage of Ferdinand of
  Aragon with Isabella of Castile." _Century Dict._]

  [Footnote 3: The kings who reigned in Aragon during the fourteenth
  century were as follows: Jaime II _el Justo_ (1291-1327), Alfonso IV
  _el Benigno_ (1327-1336), Pedro IV _el Ceremonioso_ (1336-1387),
  Juan I _el Cazador_ (1387-1395), and Martín (1395-1410).]

Aconteció una vez á este caballero, hallándose en su favorita
diversión acompañado de su hija, cuya belleza singular y
extraordinaria blancura le habían granjeado el sobrenombre de la
Azucena, que como se les entrase á más andar el día engolfados en
perseguir á una res en el monte de su feudo, tuvo que acogerse,
durante las horas de la siesta, á una cañada por donde corría un
riachuelo, saltando de roca en roca con un ruido manso y agradable.

Haría[1] cosa de unas dos horas que don Dionís se encontraba en aquel
delicioso lugar, recostado sobre la menuda grama á la sombra de una
chopera, departiendo amigablemente con sus monteros sobre las
peripecias del día, y refiriéndose unos á otros las aventuras más ó
menos curiosas que en su vida de cazador les habían acontecido, cuando
por lo alto de la más empinada ladera y á través de los alternados
murmullos del viento que agitaba las hojas de los árboles, comenzó á
percibirse, cada vez más cerca, el sonido de una esquililla semejante
á la del guión de un rebano.

  [Footnote 1: Haría = 'it must have been.' See p. 5, note 2, and p.
  42, note 1.]

En efecto, era así, pues á poco de haberse oído la esquililla,
empezaron á saltar por entre las apiñadas matas de cantueso y tomillo,
y á descender á la orilla opuesta del riachuelo, hasta unos cien
corderos, blancos como la nieve, detrás de los cuales, con su caperuza
calada para libertarse la cabeza de los perpendiculares rayos del sol,
y su atillo al hombro en la punta de un palo, apareció el zagal que
los conducía.

--Á propósito de aventuras extraordinarias, exclamó al verle uno de
los monteros de don Dionís, dirigiéndose á su señor: ahí tenéis á
Esteban el zagal, que de algún tiempo á esta parte anda más tonto que
lo que naturalmente lo hizo Dios, que no es poco, y el cual puede
haceros pasar un rato divertido refiriendo la causa de sus continuos
sustos.

--¿Pues qué le acontece á ese pobre diablo? exclamó don Dionís con
aire de curiosidad picada.

--¡Friolera! añadió el montero en tono de zumba: es el caso, que sin
haber nacido en Viernes Santo[1] ni estar señalado con la cruz,[2] ni
hallarse en relaciones con el demonic, á lo que se puede colegir de
sus hábitos de cristiano viejo, se encuentra sin saber cómo ni por
dónde, dotado de la facultad más maravillosa que ha poseído hombre
alguno, á no ser Salomón,[3] de quien se dice que sabía hasta el
lenguaje de los pájaros.

  [Footnote 1: Viernes Santo = 'Good Friday,' the Friday of Holy Week,
  anniversary of the death of Jesus Christ. Friday has long been
  considered an unlucky day, and Good Friday, in spite of its name,
  has been regarded by popular superstition as a fatal day. One born
  on that day might have particular aptitude for witchcraft.]

  [Footnote 2: señalado con la cruz = 'marked with the cross.' The
  reference here is doubtless to a birth-mark in the form of a cross,
  which would indicate a special aptitude for thaumaturgy or
  occultism. This might take the form of Christian mysticism, as in
  the case of St. Leo, who is said to have been "marked all over with
  red crosses" at birth (see Brewer, _Dictionary of Miracles_, Phila.,
  1884, p. 425), or the less orthodox form of magic, as is suggested
  here.]

  [Footnote 3: Salomón = 'Solomon.' "A famous king of Israel, 993-953
  B.C. (Duncker), son of David and Bathsheba.... The name of Solomon,
  who was supposed to have possessed extraordinary magical powers,
  plays an important part in Eastern and thence in European legends,"
  _Century Dict._ "His wisdom enabled him (as legend informs us) to
  interpret the speech of beasts and birds, a gift shared afterwards,
  it was said, by his descendant Hillel (Koran, sura 37, Ewald,
  _Gesch. Isr._, iii, 407)." M'Clintock and Strong, _Cyclopedia of
  Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature_, N.Y., 1880,
  vol. ix, p. 871.]

--¿Y á qué se refiere esa facultad maravillosa?

--Se refiere, prosiguió el montero, á que, según él afirma, y lo jura
y perjura por todo lo más sagrado del mundo, los ciervos que discurren
por estos montes, se han dado de ojo para no dejarle en paz, siendo lo
más gracioso del caso, que en más de una ocasión les ha sorprendido
concertando entre sí las burlas que han de hacerle, y después que
estas burlas se han llevado á término, ha oído las ruidosas carcajadas
con que las celebran.

Mientras esto decía el montero, Constanza, que así se llamaba la
hermosa hija de don Dionís, se había aproximado al grupo de los
cazadores, y como demostrase su curiosidad por conocer la
extraordinaria historia de Esteban, uno de éstos se adelantó hasta el
sitio en donde el zagal daba de beber á su ganado, y le condujo á
presencia de su señor, que para disipar la turbación y el visible
encogimiento del pobre mozo, se apresuro á saludarle por su nombre,
acompañando el saludo con una bondadosa sonrisa.

Era Esteban un muchacho de diecinueve á veinte años, fornido, con la
cabeza pequeña y hundida entre los hombros, los ojos pequeños y
azules, la mirada incierta y torpe como la de los albinos, la nariz
roma, los labios gruesos y entreabiertos, la frente calzada, la tez
blanca pero ennegrecida por el sol, y el cabello que le caía en parte
sobre los ojos y parte alrededor de la cara, en guedejas ásperas y
rojas semejantes á las crines de un rocín colorado.

Esto, sobre poco mas ó menos, era Esteban en cuanto al físico;
respecto á su moral, podía asegurarse sin temor de ser desmentido ni
por él ni por ninguna de las personas que le conocían, que era
perfectamente simple, aunque un tanto suspicaz y malicioso como buen
rústico.

Una vez el zagal repuesto de su turbación, le dirigió de nuevo la
palabra don Dionís, y con el tono más serio del mundo, y fingiendo un
extraordinario interés por conocer los detalles del suceso á que su
montero se había referido, le hizo una multitud de preguntas, á las
que Esteban comenzó á contestar de una manera evasiva, como deseando
evitar explicaciones sobre el asunto.

Estrechado, sin embargo, por las interrogaciones de su señor y por los
ruegos de Constanza, que parecía la más curiosa é interesada en que el
pastor refiriese sus estupendas aventuras, decidióse éste á hablar,
mas no sin que antes dirigiese á su alrededor una mirada de
desconfianza, como temiendo ser oído por otras personas que las que
allí estaban presentes, y de rascarse tres ó cuatro veces la cabeza
tratando de reunir sus recuerdos ó hilvanar su discurso, que al fin
comenzo dó esta manera:

--Es el caso, señor, que según me dijo un preste de Tarazona,[1] al
que acudí no ha mucho, para consultar mis dudas, con el diablo no
sirven juegos, sino punto en boca, buenas y muchas oraciones á San
Bartolomé,[2] que es quien le conoce las cosquillas, y dejarle andar;
que Dios, que es justo y está allá arriba, proveerá á todo. Firme en
esta idea, había decidido no volver á decir palabra sobre el asunto á
nadie, ni por nada; pero lo haré hoy por satisfacer vuestra
curiosidad, y á fe á fe que después de todo, si el diablo me lo toma
en cuenta, y torna á molestarme en castigo de mi indiscreción, buenos
Evangelios llevo cosidos á la pellica, y con su ayuda creo que, como
otras veces no me será inútil el garrote.

  [Footnote 1: Tarazona. A venerable town of some 8800 inhabitants
  situated on the river Queiles, northeast of the Moncayo (see p. 8,
  note 1) and northwest of the town of Borja.]

  [Footnote 2: San Bartolomé--'St. Bartholomew,' one of the twelve
  apostles, deemed by some to be identical with Nathanael. "Little is
  known of his work. According to tradition he preached in various
  parts of Asia, and was flayed alive and then crucified, head
  downward, at Albanopolis in Armenia. His memory is celebrated in the
  Roman Catholic church on August 24." _Century Dict._ In popular
  superstition St. Bartholomew is supposed to have had particular
  power over the devil, and prayers to this saint are thought to be
  specially efficacious against the wiles of the evil one. For a
  detailed account of St. Bartholomew's power over the devil, see
  Jacobi a Voragine, _Legenda Aurea_ (Th. Graesse), Lipsiae, MDCCCL,
  cap. cxxiii, pp. 540-544.]

--Pero, vamos, exclamó don Dionís, impaciente al escuchar las
digresiones del zagal, que amenazaban no concluir nunca; déjate de
rodeos y ve derecho al asunto.

--Á él voy, contestó con calma Esteban, que después de dar una gran
voz acompañada de un silbido para que se agruparan los corderos, que
no perdía de vista y comenzaban[1] á desparramarse por el monte, torno
á rascarse la cabeza y prosiguió así:

  [Footnote 1: que no perdía de vista y comenzaban. Compare the use of
  the relative in this phrase with that to which attention has been
  called on p. 10, note 1.]

--Por una parte vuestras continuas excursiones, y por otra el dale que
le das de los cazadores furtivos, que ya con trampa ó con ballesta no
dejan res á vida en veinte jornadas al contorno, habían no hace mucho
agotado la caza en estos montes, hasta el extremo de no encontrarse un
venado en ellos ni por un ojo de la cara.

Hablaba yo de esto mismo en el lugar, sentado en el porche de la
iglesia, donde después de acabada la misa del domingo solía reunirme
con algunos peones de los que labran la tierra de Veratón,[1] cuando
algunos de ellos me dijeron:

  [Footnote 1: Veratón. See p. 25, note 1.]

--Pues, hombre, no sé en qué consista el que tú no los topes, pues de
nosotros podemos asegurarte que no bajamos una vez á las hazas que no
nos encontremos rastro, y hace tres ó cuatro días, sin ir más lejos,
una manada, que á juzgar por las huellas debía componerse de más de
veinte, le segaron antes de tiempo una pieza de trigo al santero de la
Virgen del Romeral.[1]

  [Footnote 1: la Virgen del Romeral. A hermitage in the locality.]

--¿Y hacia qué sitio seguía el rastro? pregunté á los peones, con
animo de ver si topaba con la tropa.

--Hacia la cañada de los cantuesos, me contestaron.

No eché en saco roto la advertencia: aquella noche misma fuí á
apostarme entre los chopos. Durante toda ella estuve oyendo por acá y
por allá, tan pronto lejos como cerca, el bramido de los ciervos que
se llamaban unos á otros, y de vez en cuando sentía moverse el ramaje
á mis espaldas; pero por más que me hice todo ojos, la verdad es que
no pude distinguir á ninguno.

No obstante, al romper el día, cuando llevé los corderos al agua, á la
orilla de este río, como obra de dos tiros de honda del sitio en que
nos hallamos, y en una umbría de chopos, donde ni á la hora de siesta
se desliza un rayo de sol, encontré huellas recientes de los ciervos,
algunas ramas desgajadas, la corriente un poco turbia, y lo que es más
particular, entre el rastro de las reses las breves huellas de unos
pies[1] pequeñitos como la mitad de la palma de mi mano, sin
ponderación alguna.

  [Footnote 1: pies. Human feet are of course referred to here.]

Al decir esto, el mozo, instintivamente y al parecer buscando un punto
de comparación, dirigió la vista hacia el pie de Constanza, que
asomaba por debajo del brial, calzado de un precioso chapín de
tafilete amarillo; pero como al par de Esteban bajasen también los
ojos don Dionís y algunos de los monteros que le rodeaban, la hermosa
niña se apresuró á esconderlos, exclamando con el tono más natural del
mundo:

--¡Oh, no! por desgracia no los tengo yo tan pequeñitos, pues de ese
tamaño sólo se encuentran en las hadas; cuya historia nos refieren los
trovadores.[1]

  [Footnote 1: trovadores = 'troubadours.' "A class of early poets who
  first appeared in Provence, France. The troubadours were considered
  the inventors of a species of lyrical poetry, characterized by an
  almost entire devotion to the subject of chivalric love, and
  generally very complicated in regard to meter and rhyme. They
  fourished from the eleventh to the latter part of the thirteenth
  century, principally in the south of France, Catalonia, Aragon, and
  northern Italy." _Century Dict._ Belief in the marvelous, and hence
  in fairies, likewise characterized these poets.]

--Pues no paró aquí la cosa, continuó el zagal, cuando Constanza hubo
concluido; sino que otra vez, habiéndome colocado en otro escondite
por donde indudablemente habían de pasar los ciervos para dirigirse á
la cañada, allá al filo de la media noche me rindió un poco el sueño,
aunque no tanto que no abriese los ojos en el mismo punto en que creí
percibir que las ramas se movían á mi alrededor. Abrí los ojos según
dejo dicho: me incorporé con sumo cuidado, y poniendo atención á
aquel confuso murmullo que cada vez sonaba más próximo, oí en las
ráfagas del aire, como gritos y cantares extraños, carcajadas y tres ó
cuatro voces distintas que hablaban entre sí con un ruido y una
algarabía semejante al de las muchachas del lugar, cuando riendo y
bromeando por el camino, vuelven en bandadas de la fuente con sus
cántaros á la cabeza.

Según colegía de la proximidad de las voces y del cercano chasquido de
las ramas que crujían al romperse para dar paso á aquella turba de
locuelas, iban á salir de la espesura á un pequeño rellano que formaba
el monte en el sitio donde yo estaba oculto, cuando enteramente á mis
espaldas, tan cerca ó más que me encuentro de vosotros, oí una nueva
voz fresca, delgada y vibrante, que dijo ... creedlo, señores, esto es
tan seguro como que me he de morir ... dijo ... claro y distintamente
estas propias palabras:

  _¡Por aquí, por aquí, compañeras,
  que está ahí el bruto de Esteban!_

Al llegar á este punto de la relación del zagal, los circunstantes no
pudieron ya contener por más tiempo la risa, que hacía largo rato les
retozaba en los ojos, y dando rienda á su buen humor, prorrumpieron en
una carcajada estrepitosa. De los primeros en comenzar á reir y de los
últimos en dejarlo, fueron don Dionís, que á pesar de su fingida
circunspección no pudo por menos de tomar parte en el general
regocijo, y su hija Constanza, la cual cada vez que miraba á Esteban
todo suspenso y confuso, tornaba á reirse como una loca hasta el punto
de saltarle las lágrimas á los ojos.

El zagal, por su parte, aunque sin atender al efecto que su narración
había producido, parecía todo turbado é inquieto; y mientras los
señores reían á sabor de sus inocentadas, él tornaba la vista á un
lado y á otro con visibles muestras de temor y como queriendo
descubrir algo á través de los cruzados troncos de los árboles.

--¿Qué es eso, Esteban, qué te sucede? le preguntó uno de los monteros
notando la creciente ínquietud del pobre mozo, que ya fijaba sus
espantadas pupilas en la hija risueña de don Dionís, ya las volvía á
su alrededor con una expresión asombrada y estúpida.

--Me sucede una cosa muy extraña, exclamó Esteban. Cuando después de
escuchar las palabras que dejo referidas, me incorporé con prontitud
para sorprender á la persona que las había pronunciado, una corza
blanca como la nieve salió de entre las mismas matas en donde yo
estaba oculto, y dando unos saltos enormes por cima de los carrascales
y los lentiscos, se alejó seguida de una tropa de corzas de su color
natural, y así estas como la blanca que las iba guiando, no arrojaban
bramidos al huir, sino que se reían con unas carcajadas, cuyo eco
juraría que aún me está soñando en los oídos en este momento.

--¡Bah!... ¡bah!... Esteban, exclamó don Dionís con aire burlón, sigue
los consejos del preste de Tarazona; no hables de tus encuentros con
los corzos amigos de burlas, no sea que haga el diablo que al fin
pierdas el poco juicio que tienes; y pues ya estás provisto de los
Evangelios y sabes las oraciones de San Bartolomé, vuélvete á tus
corderos, que comienzan á desbandarse por la cañada. Si los espíritus
malignos tornan á incomodarte, ya sabes el remedio: _Pater
Noster_[1] y garrotazo.

  [Footnote 1: Pater Noster. The first words of the Lord's Prayer in
  Latin.]

El zagal, después de guardarse en el zurrón un medio pan blanco y un
trozo de came de jabalí, y en el estomago un valiente trago de vino
que le dió por orden de su señor uno de los palafreneros, despidióse
de don Dionís y su hija, y apenas anduvo cuatro pasos, comenzó á
voltear la honda para reunir á pedradas los corderos.

Como á esta sazón notase don Dionís que entre unas y otras las horas
del calor eran ya pasadas y el vientecillo de la tarde comenzaba á
mover las hojas de los chopos y á refrescar los campos, dió orden á su
comitiva para que aderezasen las caballerías que andaban paciendo
sueltas por el inmediato soto; y cuando todo estuvo á punto, hizo seña
á los unos para que soltasen las traíllas, y á los otros para que
tocasen las trompas, y saliendo en tropel de la chopera, prosiguió
adelante la interrumpida caza.


II

Entre los monteros de don Dionís habla uno llamado Garcés, hijo de un
antiguo servidor de la familia, y por tanto el más querido de sus
señores.

Garcés tenía poco más ó menos la edad de Constanza, y desde muy niño
habíase acostumbrado á prevenir el menor de sus deseos, y á adivinar y
satisfacer el más leve de sus antojos.

Por su mano se entretenía en afilar en los ratos de ocio las agudas
saetas de su ballesta de marfil; él domaba los potros que había de
montar su señora; él ejercitaba en los ardides de la caza á sus
lebreles favorites y amaestraba á sus halcones, á los cuales compraba
en las ferias de Castilla[1] caperuzas rojas bordadas de oro.

  [Footnote 1: Castilla = 'Castile.' An old kingdom of Spain, in the
  northern and central part of the peninsula. The kingdoms of Castile
  and Leon, after several unions and separations, were finally united
  under Ferdinand III in 1230. Isabella of Castile married Ferdinand
  of Aragon in 1469, and in 1479 the two kingdoms of Castile and
  Aragon were united.]

Para con los otros monteros, los pajes y la gente menuda del servicio
de don Dionís, la exquisita solicitud de Garcés y el aprecio con que
sus señores le distinguían, habíanle valido una especie de general
animadversión, y al decir de los envidiosos, en todos aquellos
cuidados con que se adelantaba á prevenir los caprichos de su señora
revelábase su carácter adulador y rastrero. No faltaban, sin embargo,
algunos que, más avisados ó maliciosos, creyeron sorprender en la
asiduidad del solícito mancebo algunos Señales de mal disimulado amor.

Si en efecto era así, el oculto cariño de Garcés tenia más que sobrada
disculpa en la incomparable hermosura de Constanza. Hubiérase
necesitado un pecho de roca y un corazón de hielo para permanecer
impasible un día y otro al lado de aquella mujer singular por su
belleza y sus raros atractivos.

La Azucena _del Moncayo_[1] llamábanla en veinte leguas á la redonda,
y bien merecía este sobrenombre, porque era tan airosa, tan blanca y
tan rubia que, como á las azucenas, parecía que Dios la había hecho de
nieve y oro.

  [Footnote 1: Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1]

Y sin embargo, entre los señores comarcanos murmurábase que la hermosa
castellana de Veratón[1] no era tan limpia de sangre como bella, y que
á pesar de sus trenzas rubias y su tez de alabastro, había tenído por
madre una gitana. Lo de cierto que pudiera haber en estas
murmuraciones, nadie pudo nunca decirlo, porque la verdad era que don
Dionís tuvo una vida bastante azarosa en su juventud, y después de
combatir largo tiempo bajo la conducta del monarca aragonés,[2] del
cual recabó entre otras mercedes el feudo del Moncayo,[3] marchóse á
Palestina,[4] en donde anduvo errante algunos años, para volver por
último á encerrarse en su castillo de Veratón,[5] con una hija
pequeña, nacida sin duda en aquellos países remotos. El único que
hubiera podido decir algo acerca del misterioso origen de Constanza,
pues acompañó a don Dionís en sus lejanas peregrinaciones, era el
padre de Garcés, y éste había ya muerto hacía bastante tiempo, sin
decir una sola palabra sobre el asunto ni á su propio hijo, que varias
veces y con muestras de grande interés, se lo habia preguntado.

  [Footnote 1: Veratón. See p. 25, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: monarca aragonés. See p. 25, note 3.]

  [Footnote 3: Moncayo. See p. 8, note 1]

  [Footnote 4: Palestina = 'Palestine.' A territory in the southern
  part of Syria. Chief city Jerusalem. "It passed under Mohammedan
  rule about 636, was held by the Christians temporarily during the
  Crusades [seventh and last under St. Louis 1270-1272], and since
  1516 has been in the possession of the Turkish government." _Century
  Dict._]

  [Footnote 5: Veratón. See p. 25, note 1.]

El carácter, tan pronto retraído y melancólico como bullicioso y
alegre de Constanza, la extraña exaltación de sus ideas, sus
extravagantes caprichos, sus nunca vistas costumbres, hasta la
particularidad de tener los ojos y las cejas negras como la noche,
siendo blanca y rubia como el oro, habían contribuido á dar pábulo á
las hablillas de sus convecinos, y aun el mismo Garcés, que tan
intimamente la trataba, había llegado á persuadirse que su señora era
algo especial y no se parecía á las demás mujeres.

Presente á la relación de Esteban, como los otros monteros, Garcés fue
acaso el único que oyó con verdadera curiosidad los pormenores de su
increible aventura, y si bien no pudo menos de sonreir cuando el zagal
repitió las palabras de la corza blanca, desde que abandonó el soto en
que habían sesteado comenzó á revolver en su mente las más absurdas
imaginaciones.

No cabe duda que todo eso del hablar las corzas es pura aprensión de
Esteban, que es un complete mentecato, decía entre sí el joven
montero, mientras que jinete en un poderoso alazán, seguía paso á paso
el palafrén de Constanza, la cual también parecia mostrarse un tanto
distraída y silenciosa, y retirada del tropel de los cazadores, apenas
tomaba parte en la fiesta. ¿Pero quien dice que en lo que refiere ese
simple no existirá algo de verdad? prosiguio pensando el mancebo.
Cosas más extrañas hemos visto en el mundo, y una corza blanca bien
puede haberla, puesto que si se ha de dar crédito á las cántigas del
país, San Huberto,[1] patrón de los cazadores, tenía una. ¡Oh, si yo
pudiese coger viva una corza blanca para ofrecérsela á mi señora!

  [Footnote 1: San Huberto = 'St. Hubert.' The patron saint of
  hunters; died about 727. His memory is celebrated by the church
  November 3. Legend says that he was the son of a nobleman of
  Aquitaine, and a keen hunter; and that once when he was engaged in
  the chase on Good Friday, in the forest of Ardennes, a stag appeared
  to him having a shining crucifix between its antlers. He heard a
  warning voice and was converted, entered, the chnrch, and became
  bishop of Maestricht and Liège. See the _Encyclopedia Americano_.

  The rôle of the deer in mythology, however, is not usually so
  beneficent, and "the antelope, the gazelle, and the stag generally,
  instead of helping the hero, involve him rather in perplexity and
  peril. This mythical subject is amplified in numerous Hindoo
  legends." See de Gubernatis, _Zoölogical Mythology_, London, 1872,
  vol. ii, p. 84 and following.

  La Biche au Bois_ (The Hind of the Woods) of Mme. d'Aulnoy is a
  story that offers some striking resemblances to _La Corza Blanca_ of
  Becquer. A beautiful princess is transformed by a wicked fairy into
  a white hind, which form she is allowed to quit at certain hours of
  the day. One day, while still in the form of the hind, she is
  pursued by her lover and wounded by an arrow. However, a release
  from the enchantment and a happy marriage end the sufferings of the
  heroine. In this Spanish tale the transformation is voluntary, which
  fact gives to Constanza the traits of a witch.

  In Wordsworth's beautiful poem _The White Doe of Rylstone_ we find
  the doe divested of all the elements of witchcraft, and in its
  solicitude for the gentle and bereft Lady Emily it is likened
  symbolically

    To the grief of her soul that doth come and go
    In the beautiful form of this innocent Doe:
    Which, though seemingly doomed in its breast to sustain
    A softened remembrance of sorrow and pain,
    Is spotless, and holy, and gentle, and bright;
    And glides o'er the earth like an angel of light.

  ]

Asi pensando y discurriendo pasó Garcés la tarde, y cuando ya el sol
comenzó á esconderse por detras de las vecinas lomas y don Dionís
mando volver grupas á su gente para tornar al castillo, separóse sin
ser notado de la comitiva y echo en busca del zagal por lo más espeso
é intrincado del monte.

La noche había cerrado casi por complete cuando don Dionís llegaba á
las puertas de su castillo. Acto continuo dispusiéronle una frugal
colación, y sentóse con su hija á la mesa.

--Y Garcés ¿dónde esta? preguntó Constanza notando que su montero no
se encontraba allí para servirla como tenía de costumbre.

--No sabemos, se apresuraron á contestar los otros servidores;
desapareció de entre nosotros cerca de la cañada, y esta es la hora en
que todavía no le hemos visto.

En este punto llegó Garcés todo sofocado, cubierta aún de sudor la
frente, pero con la cara más regocijada y satisfecha que pudiera
imaginarse.

--Perdonadme, señora, exclamó, dirigiéndose á Constanza; perdonadme si
he faltado un momento á mi obligación; pero allá de donde vengo á todo
el correr de mi caballo, como aquí, sólo me, ocupaba en serviros.

--¿En servirme? repitió Constanza; no comprendo lo que quieres decir.

--Sí, señora; en serviros, repitió el joven, pues he averiguado que es
verdad que la corza blanca existe. Á mas de Esteban, lo dan por seguro
otros varios pastores, que juran haberla visto más de una vez, y con
ayuda de los cuales espero en Dios y en mi patrón San Huberto que
antes de tres días, viva ó muerta, os la traeré al castillo.

--¡Bah!... ¡Bah!... exclamo Constanza con aire de zumba, mientras
hacían coro á sus palabras las risas más ó menos disimuladas de los
circunstantes; déjate de cacerías nocturnas y de corzas blancas: mira
que el diablo ha dado en la flor de tentar á los simples, y si te
empeñas en andarle á los talones, va á dar que reir contigo como con
el pobre Esteban.

--Señora, interrumpió Garcés con voz entrecortada y disimulando en lo
posible la cólera que le producía el burlón regocijo de sus
companeros, yo no me he visto nunca con el diablo, y por consiguiente,
no sé todavía como las gasta; pero conmigo os juro que todo podrá
hacer menos dar que reir, porque el uso de ese privilegio sólo en vos
sé tolerarlo.

Constanza conoció el efecto que su burla había producido en el
enamorado joven; pero deseando apurar su paciencia hasta lo último,
tornó á decir en el mismo tono:

--¿Y si al dispararla te saluda con alguna risa del género de la que
oyó Esteban, ó se te ríe en la nariz, y al escuchar sus sobrenaturales
carcajadas se te cae la ballesta de las manos, y antes de reponerte
del susto ya ha desaparecido la corza blanca más ligera que un
relámpago?

--¡Oh! exclamó Garcés, en cuanto á eso estad segura que como yo la
topase á tiro de ballesta, aunque me hiciese más monos que un juglar,
aunque me hablara, no ya en romance, sino en latín como el abad de
Munilla,[1] no se iba[2] sin un arpón en el cuerpo.

  [Footnote 1: Munilla. A town of 1170 inhabitants situated in the
  province of Logroño to the west of the town of Arnedillo on the
  Cidacos. Munilla was a place of considerable importance at the time
  in which the events of this story are supposed to have occurred.]

  [Footnote 2: no se iba = 'it would not escape.' See p. 108, note 3]

En este punto del diálogo, terció don Dionís, y con una desesperante
gravedad á través de la que se adivinaba toda la ironía de sus
palabras, comenzó á darle al ya asendereado mozo los consejos más
originates del mundo, para el caso de que se encontrase de manos á
boca con el demonio convertido en corza blanca.

Á cada nueva ocurrencia de su padre, Constanza fijaba sus ojos en el
atribulado Garcés y rompía á reir como una loca, en tanto que los
otros servidores esforzaban las burlas con sus miradas de inteligencia
y su mal encubierto gozo.

Mientras duró la colación prolongóse esta escena, en que la credulidad
del joven montero fué, por decirlo así, el tema obligado del general
regocijo; de modo que cuando se levantaron los paños, y don Dionís y
Constanza se retiraron á sus habitaciones, y toda la gente del
castillo se entregó al reposo, Garcés permaneció un largo espacio de
tiempo irresoluto, dudando si á pesar de las burlas de sus señores,
proseguiría firme en su propósito, o desistiría completamente de la
empresa.

--¡Qué diantre! exclamó saliendo del estado de incertidumbre en que se
encontraba: mayor mal del que me ha sucedido no puede sucederme, y si
por el contrario es verdad lo que nos ha contado Esteban ... ¡oh,
entonces, cómo he de saborear mi triunfo!

Esto diciendo, armó su ballesta, no sin haberla[1] hecho antes la
señal de la cruz en la punta de la vira, y colocándosela á la espalda
se dirigió á la poterna del castillo para tomar la vereda del monte.

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

Cuando Garcés llego á la cañada y al punto en que, según las
instrucciones de Esteban, debía aguardar la aparición de las corzas,
la luna comenzaba á remontarse con lentitud por detrás de los cercanos
montes.

Á fuer de buen cazador y práctico en el oficio, antes de elegir un
punto á propósito para colocarse al acecho de las reses, anduvo un
gran rato de acá para allá examinando las trochas y las veredas
vecinas, la disposición de los árboles, los accidentes del terreno,
las curvas del río y la profundidad de sus aguas.

Por último, después de terminar este minucioso reconocimiento del
lugar en que se encontraba, agazapose en un ribazo junto á unos chopos
de copas elevadas y obscuras, á cuyo pie crecían unas matas de
lentisco, altas lo bastante para ocultar á un hombre echado en tierra.

El río, que desde las musgosas rocas donde tenía su nacimiento venía
siguiendo las sinuosidades del Moncayo á entrar en la cañada por una
vertiente, deslizábase desde allí bañando el pie de los sauces que
sombreaban su orilla, ó jugueteando con alegre murmullo entre las
piedras rodadas del monte hasta caer en una hondura próxima al lugar
que servía de escondrijo al montero.

Los álamos, cuyas plateadas hojas movía el aire con un rumor
dulcísimo, los sauces que inclinados sobre la limpia corriente
humedecían en ella las puntas de sus desmayadas ramas, y los apretados
carrascales por cuyos troncos subían y se enredaban las madreselvas y
las campanillas azules, formaban un espeso muro de follaje alrededor
del remanso del río.

El viento, agitando los frondosos pabellones de verdura que derramaban
en torno su flotante sombra, dejaba penetrar á intervalos un furtivo
rayo de luz, que brillaba como un relámpago de plata sobre la
superficie de las aguas inmóviles y profundas.

Oculto tras los matojos, con el oído atento al más leve rumor y la
vista clavada en el punto en donde según sus cálculos debían aparecer
las corzas, Garcés esperó inútilmente un gran espacio de tiempo.

Todo permanecía á su alrededor sumido en una profunda calma.

Poco á poco, y bien fuese que el peso de la noche, que ya había pasado
de la mitad, comenzara á dejarse sentir, bien que el lejano murmullo
del agua, el penetrante aroma de las flores silvestres y las caricias
del viento comunicasen á sus sentidos el dulce sopor en que parecía
estar impregnada la naturaleza toda, el enamorado mozo que hasta aquel
punto había estado entretenido revolviendo en su mente las más
halagüeñas imaginaciones comenzó á sentir que sus ideas se elaboraban
con más lentitud y sus pensamientos tomaban formas más leves é
indecisas.

Después de mecerse un instante en ese vago espacio que media entre la
vigilia y el sueño, entornó al fin los ojos, dejó escapar la ballesta
de sus manos y se quedó profundamente dormido. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .

Cosa de dos horas ó tres haría[1] ya que el joven montero roncaba á
pierna suelta, disfrutando á todo sabor de uno de los sueños más
apacibles de su vida, cuando de repente entreabrió los ojos
sobresaltado; é incorporóse á medias lleno aún de ese estupor del que
se vuelve en sí de improviso después de un sueño profundo.

  [Footnote 1: haría = 'it must have been.' See p. 5, note 2, and p.
  26, note 1.]

En las ráfagas del aire y confundido con los leves rumores de la
noche, creyó percibir un extraño rumor de voces delgadas, dulces y
misteriosas que hablaban entre sí, reian ó cantaban cada cual por su
parte y una cosa diferente, formando una algarabia tan ruidosa y
confusa como la de los pájaros que despiertan al primer rayo del sol
entre las frondas de una alameda.

Este extraño rumor solo se dejó oir un instante, y después todo volvió
á quedar en silencio.

--Sin duda soñaba con las majaderías que nos refirió el zagal, exclamó
Garcés restregándose los ojos con mucha calma, y en la firme
persuasión de que cuanto había creído oir no era más que esa vaga
huella del ensueño que queda, al despertar, en la imaginación, como
queda en el oído la última cadencia de una melodía después que ha
expirado temblando la última nota. Y dominado por la invencible
languidez que embargaba sus miembros, iba á reclinar de nuevo la
cabeza sobre el césped, cuando tornó á oir el eco distante de aquellas
misteriosas voces, que acompañándose del rumor del aire, del agua y de
las hojas, cantaban asi:



CORO


«El arquero que velaba en lo alto de la torre ha reclinado su pesada
cabeza en el muro.

»Al cazador furtivo que esperaba sorprender la res, lo ha sorprendido
el sueño.

»El pastor que aguarda el día consultando las estrellas, duerme ahora
y dormirá hasta el amanecer.

»Reina de las ondinas,[1] sigue nuestros pasos.

  [Footnote 1: ondinas = 'undines.' Female water-sprites, without
  souls. They form one branch of the elemental spirits (see p. 24,
  note 2, and p. 47, note 1). Read Fouqué's romantic novel entitled
  _Undine_.]

»Ven á mecerte en las ramas de los sauces sobre el haz del agua.

»Ven á embriagarte con el perfume de las violetas que se abren entre
las sombras.

»Ven á gozar de la noche, que es el día de los espíritus.»

Mientras flotaban en el aire las suaves notas de aquella deliciosa
música, Garcés se mantuvo inmóvil. Después que se hubo desvanecido,
con mucha precaución apartó un poco las ramas, y no sin experimentar
algún sobresalto vió aparecer las corzas que en tropel y salvando los
matorrales con ligereza increíble unas veces, deteniéndose como á
escuchar otras, jugueteando entre sí, ya escondiéndose entre la
espesura, ya saliendo nuevamente á la senda, bajaban del monte con
dirección al remanso del río.

Delante de sus compañeras, más ágil, más linda, más juguetona y alegre
que todas, saltando, corriendo, parándose y tornando á correr, de modo
que parecía no tocar el suelo con los pies, iba la corza blanca, cuyo
extraño color destacaba como una fantástica luz sobre el obscuro fondo
de los árboles.

Aunque el joven se sentía dispuesto á ver en cuanto le rodeaba algo de
sobrenatural y maravilloso, la verdad del caso era, que prescindiendo
de la momentánea alucinación que turbó un instante sus sentidos
fingiéndole músicas, rumores y palabras, ni en la forma de las corzas
ni en sus movimientos, ni en los cortos bramidos con que parecían
llamarse, había nada con que no debiese estar ya muy familiarizado un
cazador práctico en esta clase de expediciones nocturnas.

Á medida que desechaba la primera impresión, Garcés comenzó á
comprenderlo así, y riéndose interiormente de su incredulidad y su
miedo, desde aquel instante solo se ocupó en averiguar, teniendo en
cuenta la dirección que seguían, el punto donde se hallaban las
corzas.

Hecho el cálculo, cogió la ballesta entre los dientes, y arrastrándose
como una culebra por detrás de los lentiscos, fué á situarse obra de
unos cuarenta pasos más lejos del lugar en que antes se encontraba.
Una vez acomodado en su nuevo escondite, esperó el tiempo suficiente
para que las corzas estuvieran ya dentro del río, á fin de hacer el
tiro más seguro. Apenas empezó á escucharse ese ruido particular que
produce el agua que se bate á golpes ó se agita con violencia, Garcés
comenzó á levantarse poquito á poco y con las mayores precauciones,
apoyándose en la tierra primero sobre la punta de los dedos, y después
con una de las rodillas.

Ya de pie, y cerciorándose á tientas de que el arma estaba preparada,
dió un paso hacia adelante, alargó el cuello por cima de los arbustos
para dominar el remanso, y tendió la ballesta; pero en el mismo punto
en que, á par de la ballesta, tendió la vista buscando el objeto que
había de herir, se escapó de sus labios un imperceptible é
involuntario grito de asombro.

La luna que había ido remontandose con lentitud por el ancho
horizonte, estaba inmóvil y como suspendida en la mitad del cielo. Su
dulce claridad inundaba el soto, abrillantaba la intranquila
superficie del río y hacía ver los objetos como á través de una gasa
azul.

Las corzas habían desaparecido.

En su lugar, lleno de estupor y casi de miedo, vió Garcés un grupo de
bellísimas mujeres, de las cuales, unas entraban en el agua
jugueteando, mientras las otras acababan de despojarse de las ligeras
túnicas que aún ocultaban á la codiciosa vista el tesoro de sus
formas.

En esos ligeros y cortados sueños de la mañana, ricos en imágenes
risueñas y voluptuosas, sueños diáfanos y celestes como la luz que
entonces comienza á transparentarse á través de las blancas cortinas
del lecho, no ha habido nunca imaginación de veinte años que
bosquejase con los colores de la fantasía una escena semejante á la
que se ofrecía en aquel punto á los ojos del atónito Garcés.

Despojadas ya de sus túnicas y sus velos de mil colores, que
destacaban sobre el fondo, suspendidas de los árboles ó arrojadas con
descuido sobre la alfombra del césped, las muchachas discurrían á su
placer por el soto, formando grupos pintorescos, y entraban y salían
en el agua, haciéndola saltar en chispas luminosas sobre las flores de
la margen como una menuda lluvia de rocío.

Aquí una de ellas, blanca como el vellón de un cordero, sacaba su
cabeza rubia entre las verdes y flotantes hojas de una planta
acuática, de la cual parecía una flor á medio abrir, cuyo flexible
tallo más bien se adivinaba que se veía temblar debajo de los
infinites círculos de luz de las ondas.

Otra allá, con el cabello suelto sobre los hombros mecíase suspendida
de la rama de un sauce sobre la corriente de un río, y sus pequeños
pies, color de rosa, hacían una raya de plata al pasar rozando la
tersa superficie. En tanto que éstas permanecían recostadas aún al
borde del agua con los azules ojos adormidos, aspirando con
voluptuosidad el perfume de las flores y estremeciéndose ligeramente
al contacto de la fresca brisa, aquellas danzaban en vertiginosa
ronda, entrelazando caprichosamente sus manos, dejando caer atrás la
cabeza con delicioso abandono, é hiriendo el suelo con el pie en
alternada cadencia.

Era imposible seguirlas en sus ágiles movimientos, imposible abarcar
con una mirada los infinitos detalles del cuadro que formaban, unas
corriendo, jugando y persiguiéndose con alegres risas por entre el
laberinto de los árboles; otras surcando el agua como un cisne, y
rompiendo la corriente con el levantado seno; otras, en fin,
sumergiéndose en el fondo, donde permanecían largo rato para volver á
la superficie, trayendo una de esas flores extrañas que nacen
escondidas en el lecho de las aguas profundas.

La mirada del atónito montero vagaba absorta de un lado á otro, sin
saber dónde fijarse, hasta que sentado bajo un pabellón de verdura que
parecía servirle de dosel, y rodeado de un grupo de mujeres todas á
cual más bellas, que la ayudaban á despojarse de sus ligerísimas
vestiduras, creyó ver el objeto de sus ocultas adoraciones, la hija
del noble don Dionís, la incomparable Constanza.

Marchando de sorpresa en sorpresa, el enamorado joven no se atrevía ya
á dar crédito ni al testimonio de sus sentidos, y creíase bajo la
influencia de un sueño fascinador y engañoso.

No obstante, pugnaba en vano por persuadirse de que todo cuanto veía
era efecto del desarreglo de su imaginación; porque mientras más la
miraba, y más despacio, más se convencía de que aquella mujer era
Constanza.

No podía caber duda, no: suyos eran aquellos ojos obscuros y
sombreados de largas pestañas, que apenas bastaban á amortiguar la luz
de sus pupilas; suya aquella rubia y abundante cabellera, que después
de coronar su frente se derramaba por su blanco seno y sus redondas
espaldas como una cascada de oro; suyos, en fin, aquel cuello airoso,
que sostenía su languida cabeza, ligeramente inclinada como una flor
que se rinde al peso de las gotas de rocío, y aquellas voluptuosas
formas que el había soñado tal vez, y aquellas manos semejantes a
manojos de jazmines, y aquellos pies diminutos, comparables sólo con
dos pedazos de nieve que el sol no ha podido derretir, y que á la
mañana blanquean entre la verdura.

En el momento en que Constanza salió del bosquecillo, sin velo alguno
que ocultase á los ojos de su amante los escondidos tesoros de su
hermosura, sus compañeras comenzaron nuevamente á cantar estas
palabras con una melodia dulcísima:



CORO


«Genios del aire, habitadores del luminoso éter, venid envueltos en un
jirón de niebla plateada.

»Silfos[1] invisibles, dejad el cáliz de los entreabiertos lirios, y
venid en vuestros carros de nácar al que vuelan uncidas las mariposas.

  [Footnote 1: The spirits mentioned here belong to the race of
  sub-human intelligences known in the old magical doctrine as
  elemental or elementary spirits, "who are formally grouped into four
  broad species. The air is inhabited by the amiable race of Sylphs,
  the sea by the delightful and beautiful Undines, the earth by the
  industrious race of swarthy Gnomes, and the fire by the exalted and
  glorious nation of Salamanders, who are supreme in the elementary
  hierarchy. There is a close analogy in the natures of all these
  intelligences with the more lofty constitution of certain angelical
  choirs.... the Seraphim, Virtues, and Powers (being) of a fiery
  character, the Cherubim terrestrial, the Thrones and Archangels
  aquatic, while the Dominations and Principalities are aerial." A. E.
  Waite, _The Occult Sciences_, London, 1891, p. 37.

  The elementary spirits are believed to be without souls. "Sometimes,
  however, an elementary spirit procures a soul by means of a loving
  union with one of the human race. At other times, the reverse
  happens, and the soul of the mortal is lost, who, leaving the haunts
  of men, associates with those soulless, but often amiable and
  affectionate beings." Idem, pp. 35-36. See p. 24, note 2, and p. 43,
  note 1.]

»Larvas de las fuentes,[1] abandonad el lecho de musgo y caed sobre
nosotras en menuda lluvia de perlas.

  [Footnote 1: See p. 47, note 1.]

»Escarabajos de esmeralda, luciérnagas de fuego, mariposas negras,[1]
venid!

  [Footnote 1: These insects figure frequently in popular mythology.
  Consult de Gubematis, _Zoological Mythology_, London, 1872, 2 vols.]

»Y venid vosotros todos, espíritus de la noche, venid zumbando como un
enjambre de insectos de luz y de oro.

»Venid, que ya el astro protector de los misterios[1] brilla en la
plenitud de su hermosura.

  [Footnote 1: The moon.]

»Venid, que ha llegado el momento de las transformaciones
maravillosas.

»Venid, que las que os aman os esperan impacientes.»

Garcés, que permanecía inmóvil, sintió al oir aquellos cantares
misteriosos que el áspid de los celos le mordía el corazón, y
obedeciendo á un impulso más poderoso que su voluntad, deseando romper
de una vez el encanto que fascinaba sus sentidos, separó con mano
trémula y convulsa el ramaje que le ocultaba, y de un solo salto se
puso en la margen del río. El encanto se rompió, desvanecióse todo
como el humo, y al tender en torno suyo la vista, no vió ni oyó más
que el bullicioso tropel con que las tímidas corzas, sorprendidas en
lo mejor de sus nocturnos juegos, huían espantadas de su presencia,
una por aquí, otra por allá, cuál salvando de un salto los matorrales,
cuál ganando á todo correr la trocha del monte.

--¡Oh! bien dije yo que todas estas cosas no eran más que
fantasmagorías del diablo, exclamó entonces el montero; pero por
fortuna esta vez ha andado un poco torpe dejándome entre las manos la
mejor presa.

Y en efecto, era así: la corza blanca, deseando escapar por el soto,
se había lanzado entre el laberinto de sus árboles, y enredándose en
una red de madreselvas, pugnaba en vano por desasirse. Garcés le
encaró la ballesta; pero en el mismo punto en que iba á herirla, la
corza se volvió hacia el montero, y con voz clara y aguda detuvo su
acción con un grito, diciendole:--Garcés ¿qué haces?--El joven
vaciló, y después de un instante de duda, dejó caer al suelo el arma,
espantado á la sola idea de haber podido herir á su amante. Una sonora
y estridente carcajada vino á sacarle al fin de su estupor; la corza
blanca había aprovechado aquellos cortos instantes para acabarse de
desenredar y huír ligera como un relámpago, riéndose de la burla hecha
al montero.

--¡Ah! condenado engendro de Satanás, dijo éste con voz espantosa,
recogiendo la ballesta con una rapidez indecible: pronto has cantado
la victoria, pronto te has creído fuera de mi alcance; y esto
diciendo, dejó volar la saeta, que partió silbando y fue á perderse en
la obscuridad del soto, en el fondo del cual sonó al mismo tiempo un
grito, al que siguieron después unos gemidos sofocados.

--¡Dios mío! exclamó Garcés al percibir aquellos lamentos angustiosos.
¡Dios mío, si será verdad! Y fuera de sí, como loco, sin darse cuenta
apenas de lo que le pasaba, corrió en la dirección en que había
disparado la saeta, que era la misma en que sonaban los gemidos. Llegó
al fin; pero al llegar, sus cabellos se erizaron de horror, las
palabras se anudaron en su garganta, y tuvo que agarrarse al tronco de
un árbol para no caer á tierra.

Constanza, herida por su mano, expiraba allí á su vista, revolcándose
en su propia sangre, entre las agudas zarzas del monte.



LA AJORCA DEL ORO


I

Ella era hermosa, hermosa con esa hermosura que inspira el vértigo;
hermosa con esa hermosura que no se parece en nada á la que soñamos en
los ángeles, y que, sin embargo, es sobrenatural; hermosura diabólica,
que tal vez presta el demonio á algunos seres para hacerlos sus
instrumentos en la tierra.

Él la amaba: la amaba con ese amor que no conoce freno ni límites; la
amaba con ese amor en que se busca un goce y sólo se encuentran
martirios; amor que se asemeja á la felicidad, y que, no obstante,
parece infundir el cielo para la expiación de una culpa.

Ella era caprichosa, caprichosa y extravagante, como todas las
mujeres[1] del mundo.

  [Footnote 1: This cynical view of women is repeated in some of
  Becquer's verses, and may not unlikely have been caused by a bitter
  personal experience, as the love-story embodied in the poems seems
  to suggest.]

Él, supersticioso, supersticioso y valiente, como todos los hombres de
su época.

Ella se llamaba María Antunez.

Él Pedro Alfonso de Orellana.

Los dos eran toledanos[1], y los dos vivían en la misma ciudad que los
vió nacer.

  [Footnote 1: toledanos--'of Toledo.' Toledo is the capital of a
  province of the same name. It is situated on the Tagus not far to
  the south of Madrid. "The city was the ancient capital of the
  Carpetani, and was conquered by the Romans about 193 B.C. It was the
  capital of the West-Gothic realm;... was the second city in the
  country under the Moorish rule; was taken by Alfonso VI of Castile
  and Leon in 1085;... and was the capital of Castile until superseded
  by Madrid in the sixteenth century." _Century Dict_. Population
  (1900) 23,375. Within its walls it presents the appearance of a
  Moorish city with huddled dwellings and narrow, crooked streets,
  which afford but scanty room even for the foot passenger. Viewed
  from without it is unrivaled for stern picturesqueness. "The city
  lies on a swelling granite hill in the form of a horseshoe, cut out,
  as it were, by the deep gorge of the Tagus from the mass of
  mountains to the south. On the north it is connected with the great
  plain of Castile by a narrow isthmus. At all other points the sides
  of the rocky eminence are steep and inaccessible." (Baedeker.)
  "Toledo, on its hillside, with the tawny half-circle of the Tagus at
  its feet, has the color, the roughness, the haughty poverty of the
  sierra on which it is built, and whose strong articulations from the
  very first produce an impression of energy and passion." (Quoted
  from M. Maurice Barrès in Hannah Lynch's _Toledo_, London, 1903, p.
  3.)]

La tradición que refiere esta maravillosa historia, acaecida hace
muchos años, no dice nada más acerca de los personajes que fueron sus
héroes.

Yo, en mi calidad de cronista verídico, no añadiré ni una sola palabra
de mi cosecha para caracterizarlos mejor.



II


Él la encontró un día llorando y le pregunto:--¿Por qué lloras?

Ella se enjugó los ojos, le miró fijamente, arrojó un suspiro y volvió
á llorar.

Pero entonces, acercándose á María, le tomó una mano, apoyó el codo en
el pretil árabe desde donde la hermosa miraba pasar la corriente del
río, y torno á decirle:--¿Por que lloras?

El Tajo[1] se retorcía gimiendo al pie del mirador[2] entre las rocas
sobre que se asienta la ciudad imperial.[3] El sol trasponía los
montes vecinos, la niebla de la tarde flotaba como un velo de gasa
azul, y solo el monótono ruido del agua interrumpía el alto silencio.

  [Footnote 1: El Tajo = 'The Tagus.' "The longest river in the
  Spanish peninsula.... It rises in the province of Teruel, Spain, in
  the mountain Muela de San Juan; flows west through New Castile and
  Estremadura; forms part of the boundary between Spain and Portugal;
  and empties by two arms into the Bay of Lisbon. The chief city on
  its banks in Spain is Toledo." _Century Dict._]

  [Footnote 2: mirador = 'lookout,' a kind of bow in the wall
  surrounding some of the heights of Toledo.]

  [Footnote 3: imperial. Referring probably to the time of the Roman
  dominion, which, though it lasted some two hundred years, has left
  in the monuments of Toledo very little evidence of its duration. See
  p. 50, note 2.]

María exclamó:--No me preguntes por qué lloro, no me lo preguntes;
pues ni yo sabré contestarte, ni tú comprenderme. Hay deseos que se
ahogan en nuestra alma de mujer, sin que los revele más que un
suspiro; ideas locas que cruzan por nuestra imaginación, sin que ose
formularlas el labio, fenómenos incomprensibles de nuestra naturaleza
misteriosa, que el hombre no puede ni aún concebir. Te lo ruego, no me
preguntes la causa de mi dolor; si te la revelase, acaso te arrancaría
una carcajada.

Cuando estas palabras expiraron, ella tornó á inclinar la frente, y él
á reiterar sus preguntas.

La hermosa, rompiendo al fin su obstinado silencio, dijo á su amante
con voz sorda y entrecortada.

--Tú lo quieres, es una locura que te hará reir; pero no importa: te
lo diré, puesto que lo deseas.

Ayer estuve en el templo.[1] Se celebraba la fiesta de la Virgen;[2]
su imagen, colocada en el altar mayor sobre un escabel de oro,
resplandecía como un[3] ascua de fuego; las notas del órgano temblaban
dilatándose de eco en eco por el ámbito de la iglesia, y en el coro
los sacerdotes entonaban el _Salve, Regina_[4]

  [Footnote 1: templo. Reference is made here to the cathedral of
  Toledo.]

  [Footnote 2: la fiesta de la Virgen. Probably the festival of the
  Assumption, August 15, as this is generally considered the most
  important of the various festivals in honor of the Virgin, such as,
  for example, the Nativity of Mary (September 8), the Purification of
  the Blessed Virgin (February 2), and the Annunciation (March 25).]

  [Footnote 3: un. For _una_. This use is not sanctioned by the
  Spanish Academy, nor, as Knapp says, "by the best modern writers."]

  [Footnote 4: Salve, Regina = 'Hail, Queen (of Mercy).' The first
  words of a Latin antiphon ascribed to Hermannus Contractus (b.
  1013-d. 1054). In mediaeval times it was a great favorite with the
  church, and was appointed for use at compline, from the first
  vespers of Trinity Sunday up to nones on the Saturday before Advent
  Sunday. See John Julian, _Dictionary of Hymnology_, London, 1892, p.
  991.]

Yo rezaba, rezaba absorta en mis pensamientos religiosos, cuando
maquinalmente levanté la cabeza y mi vista se dirigió al altar. No sé
por qué mis ojos se fijaron desde luego en la imagen, digo mal, en la
imagen no; se fijaron en un objeto que hasta entonces no había visto,
un objeto que, sin poder explicármelo, llamaba sobre sí toda mi
atención. No te rías ... aquel objeto era la ajorca de oro que tiene
la Madre de Dios en uno de los brazos en que descansa su divino
Hijo.... Yo aparte la vista y torné á rezar.... ¡Imposible! Mis ojos
se volvían involuntariamente al mismo punto. Las luces del altar,
reflejándose en las mil facetas de sus diamantes, se reproducían de
una manera prodigiosa. Millones de chispas de luz rojas y azules,
verdes y amarillas, volteaban alrededor de las piedras como un
torbellino de átomos de fuego, como una vertiginosa ronda de esos
espíritus de las llamas que fascinan con su brillo y su increíble
inquietud....

Salí del templo, vine á casa, pero vine con aquella idea fija en la
imaginación. Me acosté para dormir; no pude.... Pasó la noche, eterna
con aquel pensamiento.... Al amanecer se cerraron mis párpados, y, ¿lo
creerás? aun en el sueño veía cruzar, perderse y tornar de nuevo una
mujer, una mujer morena y hermosa, que llevaba la joya de oro y de
pedrería; una mujer, sí, porque ya no era la Virgen que yo adoro y
ante quien me humillo, era una mujer, otra mujer como yo, que me
miraba y se reía mofándose de mí.--¿La ves? parecía decirme,
mostrándome la joya.--¡Cómo brilla! Parece un círculo de estrellas
arrancadas del cielo de una noche de verano. ¿La ves? pues no es tuya,
no lo será nunca, nunca.... Tendrás acaso otras mejores, más ricas, si
es posible; pero ésta, ésta que resplandece de un modo tan fantástico,
tan fascinador ... nunca ... nunca ...--Desperté; pero con la misma
idea fija aquí, entonces como ahora, semejante á un clavo ardiente,
diabólica, incontrastable, inspirada sin duda por el mismo Satanás....
¿Y qué?... Callas, callas y doblas la frente.... ¿No te hace reir mi
locura?

Pedro, con un movimiento convulsive, oprimió el puño de su espada,
levantó la cabeza, que en efecto había inclinado, y dijo con voz
sorda:

--¿Que Virgen tiene esa presea?

--La del Sagrario,[1] murmuró María.

  [Footnote 1: La (Virgen) del Sagrario. A highly venerated figure of
  the Virgin, made of a dark-colored wood and almost covered with
  valuable jewels. It stands now in the chapel of the same name, to
  which visitors are seldom admitted.]

--¡La del Sagrario! repitió el joven con acento de terror: ¡la del
Sagrario de la catedral!...

Y en sus facciones se retrató un instante el estado de su alma,
espantada de una idea.

--¡Ah! ¿por qué no la posee otra Virgen?[1] prosiguió con acento
enérgico y apasionado; ¿por qué no la tiene el arzobispo en su mitra,
el rey en su corona, ó el diablo entre sus garras? Yo se la arrancaría
para tí, aunque me costase la vida ó la condenación. Pero á la Virgen
del Sagrario, á nuestra Santa Patrona, yo ... yo que he nacido en
Toledo, ¡imposible, imposible!

  [Footnote 1: otra Virgen. There are several other statues of the
  Virgin in the cathedral, for which, however, less reverence is felt.
  The choice of certain statues of Christ or of the Virgin for special
  veneration is very characteristic of Spanish Catholics. See p. 152,
  note 2.]

--¡Nunca! murmuro María con voz casi imperceptible; ¡nunca!

Y siguió llorando.

Pedro fijó una mirada estúpida en la corriente del río. En la
corriente, que pasaba y pasaba sin cesar ante sus extraviados ojos,
quebrándose al pie del mirador entre las rocas sobre que se asienta la
ciudad imperial.



III


¡La catedral de Toledo![1] Figuraos un bosque de gigantes palmeras de
granito que al entrelazar sus ramas forman una bóveda colosal y
magnífica, bajo la que se guarece y vive, con la vida que le ha
prestado el genio, toda una creación de seres imaginarios y reales.

  [Footnote 1: La catedral de Toledo. The construction of the Toledo
  Cathedral is essentially of the thirteenth century, although it was
  not finished until 1493. The exterior of this vast church, with its
  great doors, rose-windows, and beautiful Gothic towers, the northern
  one of which (295 ft.) has alone been finished, is of surpassing
  grandeur and beauty, and nothing could be more sumptuous or more
  impressive than its interior. "And should time be short for detailed
  inspection, it is this general effect of immense naves, of a forest
  of columns and of jeweled windows that we carry away, feeling too
  small amidst such greatness of form and incomparable loveliness of
  lights for the mere expression of admiration." Hannah Lynch,
  _Toledo_, London, 1903, pp. 150-151.]

Figuraos un caos incomprensible de sombra y luz, en donde se mezclan y
confunden con las tinieblas de las naves los rayos de colores de las
ojivas; donde lucha y se pierde con la obscuridad del santuario el
fulgor de las lámparas.

Figuraos un mundo de piedra, inmenso como el espíritu de nuestra
religión, sombrío como sus tradiciones, enigmático como sus parábolas,
y todavía no tendréis una idea remota de ese eterno monumento del
entusiasmo y la fe de nuestros mayores, sobre el que los siglos ban
derramado á porfía el tesoro de sus creencias, de su inspiration y de
sus artes.

En su seno viven el silencio, la majestad, la poesía del misticismo, y
un santo horror que defiende sus umbrales contra los pensamientos
mundanos y las mezquinas pasiones de la tierra.

La consunción material se alivia respirando el aire puro de las
montañas; el ateísmo debe curarse respirando su atmosfera de fe.

Pero si grande, si imponente se presenta la catedral á nuestros ojos á
cualquier hora que se penetra en su recinto misterioso y sagrado,
nunca produce una impresión tan profunda como en los días en que
despliega todas las galas de su pompa religiosa, en que sus
tabernáculos se cubren de oro y pedrería, sus gradas de alfombra y sus
pilares de tapices.

Entonces, cuando arden despidiendo un torrente de luz sus mil lámparas
de plata; cuando flota en el aire una nube de incienso, y las voces
del coro, y la armonía de los órganos y las campanas de la torre
estremecen el edificio desde sus cimientos más profundos hasta las más
altas agujas que lo coronan, entonces es cuando se comprende, al
sentirla, la tremenda majestad de Dios que vive en él, y lo anima con
su soplo y lo llena con el reflejo de su omnipotencia.

El mismo día en que tuvo lugar la escena que acabamos de referir, se
celebraba en la catedral de Toledo el último de la magnífica octava de
la Virgen.[1]

  [Footnote 1: octava de la Virgen. The eight days during which is
  solemnized the principal fête of the Virgin, August 15-22. See p.
  52, note 3.]

La fiesta religiosa había traído á ella una multitud inmensa de
fieles; pero ya ésta se había dispersado en todas direcciones; ya se
habían apagado las luces de las capillas y del altar mayor, y las
colosales puertas del templo habían rechinado sobre sus goznes para
cerrarse detrás del último toledano, cuando de entre las sombras, y
pálido, tan pálido como la estatua de la tumba en que se apoyo un
instante mientras dominaba su emoción, se adelantó un hombre que vino
deslizándose con el mayor sigilo hasta la verja del crucero. Allí la
claridad de una lámpara permitía distinguir sus facciones.

Era Pedro.

¿Que había pasado entre los dos amantes para que se arrastrara al fin
á poner por obra una idea que sólo el concebirla había erizado sus
cabellos de horror? Nunca pudo saberse.

Pero él estaba allí, y estaba allí para llevar á cabo su criminal
propósito. En su mirada inquieta, en el temblor de sus rodillas, en el
sudor que corría en anchas gotas por su frente, llevaba escrito su
pensamiento.

La catedral estaba sola, completamente sola, y sumergida en un
silencio profundo.

No obstante, de cuando en cuando se percibían como unos rumores
confusos: chasquidos de madera tal vez, ó murmullos del viento, ó
¿quién sabe? acaso ilusión de la fantasía, que oye y ve y palpa en su
exaltación lo que no existe, pero la verdad era que ya cerca, ya
lejos, ora á sus espaldas, ora á su lado mismo, sonaban como sollozos
que se comprimen, como roce de telas que se arrastran, como rumor de
pasos que van y vienen sin cesar.

Pedro hizo un esfuerzo para seguir en su camino, llego á la verja, y
subió la primera grada de la capilla mayor.[1] Alrededor de esta
capilla están las tumbas de los reyes,[2] cuyas imágenes de piedra,
con la mano en la empuñadura de la espada, parecen velar noche y día
por el santuario á cuya sombra descansan todos por una eternidad.

  [Footnote 1: la primera ... mayor. There are three steps that lead
  up to the chapel, which is separated from the transept to-day by a
  magnificent reja (screen or grating), dating from 1548, and is
  filled with treasures of art.]

  [Footnote 2: los reyes. Alfonso VII, the Infante Don Pedro de
  Aguilar (son of Alfonso XI), Sancho III, and Sancho IV are buried
  here.]

--¡Adelante! murmuró en voz baja, y quiso andar y no pudo. Parecía que
sus pies se habían clavado en el pavimento. Bajó los ojos, y sus
cabellos se erizaron de horror: el suelo de la capilla lo formaban
anchas y obscuras losas sepulcrales.

Por un momento creyó que una mano fría y descarnada le sujetaba en
aquel punto con una fuerza invencible. Las moribundas lámparas, que
brillaban en el fondo de las naves como estrellas perdidas entre las
sombras, oscilaron á su vista, y oscilaron las estatuas de los
sepulcros y las imágenes del altar, y osciló el templo todo con sus
arcadas de granito y sus machones de sillería.

--¡Adelante! volvió á exclamar Pedro como fuera de sí, y se acercó al
ara, y trepando por ella subió hasta el escabel de la imagen. Todo
alrededor suyo se revestía de formas quiméricas y horribles; todo era
tinieblas y luz dudosa, más imponente aún que la obscuridad. Sólo la
Reina de los cielos, suavemente iluminada por una lámpara de oro,
parecía sonreir tranquila, bondadosa, y serena en medio de tanto
horror.

Sin embargo, aquella sonrisa muda é inmóvil que le tranquilizara[1] un
instante, concluyó por infundirle temor; un temor más extraño, más
profundo que el que hasta entonces había sentido.

  [Footnote 1: tranquilizara. See p.16, note 3.]

Tornó empero á dominarse, cerró los ojos para no verla, extendió la
mano con un movimiento convulsivo y le arrancó la ajorca de oro,
piadosa ofrenda de un santo arzobispo; la ajorca de oro cuyo valor
equivalía á una fortuna.[2]

  [Footnote 2: equivalía á una fortuna. The jewels of this Virgin,
  presents for the most part from crowned heads and high church
  dignitaries, are in fact of immense value.]

Ya la presea estaba en su poder: sus dedos crispados la oprimían con
una fuerza sobrenatural, sólo restaba huir, huir con ella: pero para
esto era preciso abrir los ojos, y Pedro tenía miedo de ver, de ver la
imagen, de ver los reyes de las sepulturas, los demonios de las
cornisas, los endriagos de los capiteles, las fajas de sombras y los
rayos de luz que semejantes á blancos y gigantescos fantasmas, se
movían lentamente en el fondo de las naves, pobladas de rumores
temerosos y extraños.

Al fin abrió los ojos, tendió una mirada, y un grito agudo se escapó
de sus labios.

La catedral estaba llena de estatuas, estatuas que, vestidas con
luengos y no vistos ropajes, habían descendido de sus huecos, y
ocupaban todo el ámbito de la iglesia, y le miraban con sus ojos sin
pupila.

Santos, monjas, ángeles, demonios, guerreros, damas, pajes, cenobitas
y villanos, se rodeaban y confundían en las naves y en el altar. Á sus
pies oficiaban, en presencia de los reyes, de hinojos sobre sus
tumbas, los arzobispos de mármol que él había visto otras veces,
inmóviles sobre sus lechos mortuorios, mientras que arrastrándose por
las losas, trepando por los machones, acurrucados en los doseles,
suspendidos de las bóvedas, pululaban como los gusanos de un inmenso
cadáver, todo un mundo de reptiles y alimañas de granito, quimericos,
deformes, horrorosos.

Ya no pudo resistir más. Las sienes le latieron con una violencia
espantosa; una nube de sangre obscureció sus pupilas, arrojó un
segundo grito, un grito desgarrador y sobrehumano, y cayó desvanecido
sobre el ara.

Cuando al otro día los dependientes de la iglesia le encontraron al
pie del altar, tenía aún la ajorca de oro entre sus manos, y al verlos
aproximarse, exclamó con una estridente carcajada:

--¡Suya, suya!

El infeliz estaba loco.




EL CRISTO DE LA CALAVERA[1]

  [Footnote 1: See p. 70, note 1.]


El rey de Castilla[1] marchaba á la guerra de moros,[2] y para
combatir con los enemigos de la religión había apellidado en son de
guerra á todo lo más florido de la nobleza de sus reinos. Las
silenciosas calles de Toledo[3] resonaban noche y día con el marcial
rumor de los atabales y los clarines, y ya en la morisca puerta de
Visagra,[4] ya en la del Cambrón,[5] en la embocadura del antiguo
puente de San Martín,[6] no pasaba hora sin que se oyese el ronco
grito de los centinelas, anunciando la llegada de algún caballero que,
precedido de su pendón señorial y seguido de jinetes y peones, venía á
reunirse al grueso del ejército castellano.

  [Footnote 1: See p. 34, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: moros = 'Moors.' The Arabs who conquered Mauritania in
  the Seventh century converted the native race to Mohammedanism, and
  it was this mixed population that entered Spain by Gibraltar in 71.
  There they remained in almost constant warfare with the Christians
  until they were finally defeated at Granada by the armies of
  Ferdinand and Isabella and driven from Spain in 1492.

  Toledo was entered by the Christians under Alfonso VI in 1085. From
  this time on Christian arms began to prevail in the peninsula.]

  [Footnote 3: Toledo. See p. 50, note 2.]

  [Footnote 4: puerta de Visagra. The gate referred to here is the
  _Puerta Visagra Antigua_, an ancient Arab gate of the ninth century,
  a little to the west of the _Puerta Visagra Actual_, which latter
  was not built until 1550. The old _Puerta Visagra_ is now blocked
  up. It was through this gateway that Alfonso VI entered Toledo. "The
  work is entirely Moorish, of the first period, heavy and simple,
  with the triple arches so delightfully curved in horseshoe shape,
  and the upper crenelated apertures." H. Lynch, _Toledo_, London,
  1903, p. 297. Its name is probably from the Arabic, either from _Bâb
  Shaqrâ_ (red gate) or _Bâb Sharâ_ (field-gate).]

  [Footnote 5: la del Cambrón. The Puerta del Cambrón is one of the
  three open gateways in the outer walls of Toledo to-day. "Entering
  the city by the Bridge of San Martín, you front the gate of the
  Cambrón, so called from the brambles that grew about that small,
  charming, pinnacled edifice, which was built upon the spot of
  Wamba's old gate in Alfonso VI's time, and was then completely
  Moorish in style. In 1576 it was restored and took on its present
  half renaissance, half classical aspect." Ib., p. 295.]

  [Footnote 6: Puente de San Martín. "The imposing _Puente de San
  Martín_, which spans the Tagus to the west of the town, was built in
  1212 and renewed in 1390. It consists of five arches, that in the
  center being about 100 ft. in height Each end is guarded by a
  gate-tower.... The gorge of the Tagus here is very imposing."
  Baedeker, _Spain and Portugal_ (1901), p. 150.]

El tiempo que faltaba para emprender el camino de la frontera y
concluir de ordenar las huestes reales, discurría en medio de fiestas
públicas, lujosos convites y lucidos torneos, hasta que, llegada al
fin la víspera del día señalado de antemano por S.A.[1] para la salida
del éjercito, se dispuso un postrer sarao, con el que debieran
terminar los regocijos.

  [Footnote 1: S. A. Abbreviation for Su Alteza, 'His Highness,' a
  title given to the kings of Spain down to the Austrian dynasty, and
  now applied to princes and regents.]

La noche del sarao, el alcázar[1] de los reyes ofrecía un aspecto
singular. En los anchurosos patios, alrededor de inmensas hogueras, y
diseminados sin orden ni concierto, se veía una abigarrada multitud de
pajes, soldados, ballesteros y gente menuda, quienes, éstos aderezando
sus corceles y sus armas y disponiendolos para el combate; aquéllos
saludando con gritos ó blasfemias las inesperadas vueltas de la
fortuna, personificad a en los dados del cubilete, los otros
repitiendo en coro el refrán de un romance de guerra, que entonaba un
juglar acompañado de la guzla; los de más allá comprando á un romero
conchas,[2] cruces y cintas tocadas en el sepulcro de Santiago,[3] ó
riendo con locas carcajadas de los chistes de un bufón, ó ensayando en
los clarines el aire bélico para entrar en la pelea, propio de sus
señores, ó refiriendo antiguas historias de caballerías ó aventuras de
amor, ó milagros recientemente acaecidos, formaban un infernal y
atronador conjunto imposible de pintar con palabras.

  [Footnote 1: el alcázar. The Alcazar (Arab, _al qaçr_, 'the castle')
  "stands on the highest ground in Toledo. The site was originally
  occupied by a Roman '_castellum_' which the Visigoths also used as a
  citadel. After the capture of the city by Alfonso VI the Cid resided
  here as 'Alcaide.' Ferdinand the Saint and Alfonso the Learned
  converted the castle into a palace, which was afterwards enlarged
  and strengthened by John II, Ferdinand and Isabella, Charles V, and
  Philip II." (Baedeker, 1901, p. 152) It has been burned and restored
  several times. The magnificent staircase is due to Charles V, whose
  name the Alcazar sometimes bears.]

  [Footnote 2: conchas = 'shells.' During the Middle Ages pilgrims
  often ornamented their clothing with shells, particularly with
  scallop-shells, to indicate doubtless that they had crossed the sea
  to the Holy Shrine in Palestine; for this reason the scallops were
  known as "pilgrim shells." See the _Encyclopedia Americana_
  ("Shell"). According to one of the legends the remains of St. James
  were brought to Spain in a scallop-shell; hence the use of that
  emblem by pilgrims to his sanctuary.]

  [Footnote 3: Santiago = 'St. James,' the patron saint of Spain. A
  legend of about the twelfth century tells us that the remains of St.
  James the Greater, son of Zebedee, after he was beheaded in Judea,
  were miraculously brought to Spain and interred in a spot whose
  whereabouts was not known until in the ninth century a brilliant
  star pointed out the place ('campus stellae'). The cathedral of
  Santiago de Compostela was erected there, and throughout the Middle
  Ages it was one of the most popular pilgrim-resorts in Christendom.]

Sobre aquel revuelto océano de cantares de guerra, rumor de martillos
que golpeaban los yunques, chirridos de limas que mordían el acero,
piafar de corceles, voces descompuestas, risas inextinguibles, gritos
desaforados, notas destempladas, juramentos y sonidos extraños y
discordes, flotaban á intervalos como un soplo de brisa armoniosa los
lejanos acordes de la música del sarao.

Éste, que tenía lugar en los salones que formaban el segundo cuerpo
del alcázar, ofrecia a su vez un cuadro, si no tan fantastico y
caprichoso, más deslumbrador y magnífico.

Por las extensas galerías que se prolongaban á lo lejos formando un
intrincado laberinto de pilastras esbeltas y ojivas caladas y ligeras
como el encaje, por los espaciosos salones vestidos de tapices, donde
la seda y el oro habían representado, con mil colores diversos,
escenas de amor, de caza y de guerra, y adornados con trofeos de armas
y escudos, sobre los cuales vertían un mar de chispeante luz un
sinnúmero de lámparas y candelabros de bronce, plata y oro, colgadas
aquéllas de las altísimas bóvedas, y enclavados éstos en los gruesos
sillares de los muros; por todas partes á donde se volvían los ojos,
se veían oscilar y agitarse en distintas direcciones una nube de damas
hermosas con ricas vestiduras, chapadas en oro, redes de perlas
aprisionando sus rizos, joyas de rubíes llameando sobre su seno,
plumas sujetas en vaporoso cerco á un mango de marfil, colgadas del
puño, y rostrillos de 'blancos encajes, que acariciaban sus mejillas,
ó alegres turbas de galanes con talabartes de terciopelo, justillos de
brocado y calzas de seda, borceguíes de tafilete, capotillos de mangas
perdidas y caperuza, puñales con pomo de filigrana y estoques de
corte, bruñidos, delgados y ligeros.

Pero entre esta juventud brillante y deslumbradora, que los ancianos
miraban desfilar con una sonrisa de gozo, sentados en los altos
sitiales de alerce que rodeaban el estrado real llamaba la atención
por su belleza incomparable, una mujer aclamada reina de la hermosura
en todos los torneos y las cortes de amor de la época, cuyos colores
habían adoptado por emblema los caballeros más valientes; cuyos
encantos eran asunto de las coplas de los trovadores más versados en
la ciencia del gay saber; á la que se volvían con asombro todas las
miradas; por la que suspiraban en secreto todos los corazones,
alrededor de la cual se veían agruparse con afán, como vasallos
humildes en torno de su señora, los más ilustres vástagos de la
nobleza toledana, reunida en el sarao de aquella noche. Los que
asistían de continuo á formar el séquito de presuntos galanes de doña
Inés de Tordesillas, que tal era el nombre de esta celebrada
hermosura, á pesar de su carácter altivo y desdeñoso, no desmayaban
jamás en sus pretensiones; y éste, animado con una sonrisa que había
creído adivinar en sus labios; aquél, con una mirada benévola que
juzgaba haber sorprendido en sus ojos; el otro, con una palabra
lisonjera, un ligerísimo favor ó una promesa remota, cada cual
esperaba en silencio ser el preferido. Sin embargo, entre todos ellos
había dos que más particularmente se distinguían por su asiduidad y
rendimiento, dos que al parecer, si no los predilectos de la hermosa,
podrían calificarse de los más adelantados en el camino de su corazón.
Estos dos caballeros, iguales en cuna, valor y nobles prendas,
servidores de un mismo rey y pretendientes de una misma dama,
llamábanse Alonso de Carrillo el uno, y el otro Lope de Sandoval.

Ambos habían nacido en Toledo; juntos habían hecho sus primeras armas,
y en un mismo día, al encontrarse sus ojos con los de doña Inés, se
sintieron poseídos de un secreto y ardiente amor por ella, amor que
germinó algún tiempo retraído y silencioso, pero que al cabo comenzaba
á descubrirse y á dar involuntarias señales de existencia en sus
acciones y discursos.

En los torneos del Zocodover,[1] en los juegos florales de la corte,
siempre que se les había presentado coyuntura para rivalizar entre sí
en gallardía ó donaire, la habían aprovechado con afán ambos
caballeros, ansiosos de distinguirse á los ojos de su dama; y aquella
noche, impelidos sin duda por un mismo afán, trocando los hierros por
las plumas y las mallas por los brocados y la seda, de pie junto al
sitial donde ella se reclinó un instante después de haber dado una
vuelta por los salones, comenzaron una elegante lucha de frases
enamoradas é ingeniosas, ó epigramas embozados y agudos.

  [Footnote 1: El Zocodover. A small, quaint, three-cornered plaza,
  with two sides straight and the third curved, surrounded by
  buildings with rough arcades shading the shops on the ground floor.
  It used to be the scene of tournaments and bull-fights, as well as
  being the market-place, as it is to-day. "The life of the city then
  (after the Christian conquest), as now, spread from the Zocodover,
  word of inexplicable charm, said to be Arabian and to signify 'Place
  of the Beasts.' Down the picturesque archway, cut in deep yellow
  upon such a blue as only southern Europe can show at all seasons, a
  few steps lead you to the squalid ruin where Cervantes slept, ate
  and wrote the _Ilustre Fregona_. So exactly must it have been in the
  day Cervantes suffered and smiled, offering to his mild glance just
  such a wretched and romantic front." H. Lynch, _op. cit._, pp.
  119-120]

Los astros menores de esta brillante constelación, formando un dorado
semicírculo en torno de ambos galanes, reían y esforzaban las
delicadas burlas; y la hermosa, objeto de aquel torneo de palabras,
aprobaba con una imperceptible sonrisa los conceptos escogidos ó
llenos de intención, que, ora salían de los labios de sus adoradores,
como una ligera onda de perfume que halagaba su vanidad, ora partían
como una saeta aguda que iba á buscar para clavarse en él, el punto
más vulnerable del contrario, su amor propio.

Ya el cortesano combate de ingenio y galanura comenzaba á hacerse de
cada vez más crudo; las frases eran aún corteses en la forma, pero
breves, secas, y al pronunciarlas, si bien las acompañaba una ligera
dilatación de los labios, semejante á una sonrisa, los ligeros
relámpagos de los ojos imposibles de ocultar, demostraban que la
cólera hervía comprimida en el seno de ambos rivales.

La situación era insostenible. La dama lo comprendió así, y
levantándose del sitial se disponía á volver á los salones, cuando un
nuevo incidente vino á romper la valla del respetuoso comedimiento en
que se contenían los dos jóvenes enamorados. Tal vez con intención,
acaso por descuido, doña Inés había dejado sobre su falda uno de los
perfumados guantes, cuyos botones de oro se entretenía en arrancar uno
á uno mientras duró la conversación. Al ponerse de pie, el guante
resbaló por entre los anchos pliegues de seda, y cayó en la alfombra.
Al verle caer, todos los caballeros que formaban su brillante comitiva
se inclinaron presurosos á recogerle,[1] disputándose el honor de
alcanzar un leve movimiento de cabeza en premio de su galantería.

  [Footnote 1: le. This use of the accusative _le_ instead of _lo_,
  when the object is not personal, is sanctioned by the Spanish
  Academy. See _Gramática de La Lengua Castellana por La Real Academia
  Española_, nueva edición, Madrid, 1901, p. 241.]

Al notar la precipitación con que todos hicieron el ademán de
inclinarse, una imperceptible sonrisa de vanidad satisfecha asomó á
los labios de la orgullosa doña Inés, que después de hacer un saludo
general á los galanes que tanto empeño mostraban en servirla, sin
mirar apenas y con la mirada alta y desdeñosa, tendió la mano para
recoger el guante en la dirección que se encontraban Lope y Alonso,
los primeros que parecían haber llegado al sitio en que cayera.[1] En
efecto, ambos jóvenes habían visto caer el guante cerca de sus pies;
ambos se habían inclinado con igual presteza á recogerle,[2] y al
incorporarse cada cual le[2] tenía asido por un extremo. Al verlos
inmóviles, desafiándose en silencio con la mirada, y decididos ambos á
no abandonar el guante que acababan de levantar del suelo, la dama
dejó escapar un grito leve é involuntario, que ahogó el murmullo de
los asombrados espectadores, los cuales presentían una escena
borrascosa, que en el alcázar y en presencia del rey podría
calificarse de un horrible desacato.

  [Footnote 1: _cayera_. See p. 16, note 3.]

  [Footnote 2: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

No obstante, Lope y Alonso permanecían impasibles, mudos, midiéndose
con los ojos, de la cabeza á los pies, sin que la tempestad de sus
almas se revelase más que por un ligero temblor nervioso, que agitaba
sus miembros como si se hallasen acometidos de una repentina fiebre.

Los murmullos y las exclamaciones iban subiendo de punto; la gente
comenzaba á agruparse en torno de los actores de la escena; doña Inés,
ó aturdida ó complaciéndose en prolongarla, daba vueltas de un lado á
otro, como buscando donde refugiarse y evitar las miradas de la gente,
que cada vez acudía en mayor número. La catástrofe era ya segura; los
dos jóvenes habían ya cambiado algunas palabras en voz sorda, y
mientras que con la una mano sujetaban el guante con una fuerza
convulsiva, parecían ya buscar instintivamente con la otra el puño de
oro de sus dagas, cuando se entreabrió respetuosamente el grupo que
formaban los espectadores, y apareció el Rey.

Su frente estaba serena; ni había indignación en su rostro, ni cólera
en su ademán.

Tendió una mirada alrededor, y esta sola mirada fué bastante para
darle á conocer lo que pasaba. Con toda la galantería del doncel más
cumplido, tomó el guante de las manos de los caballeros que, como
movidas por un resorte, se abrieron sin dificultad al sentir el
contacto de la del monarca, y volviéndose á doña Inés de Tordesillas
que, apoyada en el brazo de una dueña,[1] parecía próxima á
desmayarse, exclamó, presentándolo, con acento, aunque templado,
firme:

  [Footnote 1: dueña = 'duenna,' an elderly woman who occupies a
  position midway between that of governess and companion to young
  Spanish women.]

--Tomad, señora, y cuidad de no dejarle[1] caer en otra ocasión, donde
al devolvérosle,[2] os lo devuelvan manchado en sangre.

  [Footnote 1: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: le. See p. 66, note 1.]

Cuando el rey terminó de decir estas palabras, doña Inés, no
acertaremos á decir si á impulsos de la emoción, ó por salir más
airosa del paso, se había desvanecido en brazos de los que la
rodeaban.

Alonso y Lope, el uno estrujando en silencio entre sus manos el
birrete de terciopelo, cuya pluma arrastraba por la alfombra, y el
otro mordiéndose los labios hasta hacerse brotar la sangre, se
clavaron una mirada tenaz é intensa.

Una mirada en aquel lance equivalía á un bofetón, á un guante arrojado
al rostro, á un desafío á muerte.




II


Al llegar la media noche, los reyes se retiraron á su camara. Terminó
el sarao y los curiosos de la plebe que aguardaban con impaciencia
este momento, formando grupos y corrillos en las avenidas del palacio,
corrieron á estacionarse en la cuesta del alcázar,[1] los miradores[2]
y el Zocodover.

  [Footnote 1: la cuesta del alcázar. This is the name of the street
  that leads from the Zocodover up to the height on which is situated
  the Alcazar (see p. 61, note 3).]

  [Footnote 2: miradores. See p. 51 note 2.]

Durante una ó dos horas, en las calles inmediatas á estos puntos reinó
un bullicio, una animación y un movimiento indescriptibles. Por todas
partes se veían cruzar escuderos caracoleando en sus corceles
ricamente enjaezados; reyes de armas con lujosas casullas llenas de
escudos y blasones: timbaleros vestidos de colores vistosos, soldados
cubiertos de armaduras resplandecientes, pajes con capotillos de
terciopelo y birretes coronados de plumas, y servidores de á pie que
precedían las lujosas literas y las andas cubiertas de ricos paños,
llevando en sus manos grandes hachas encendidas, á cuyo rojizo
resplandor podía verse á la multitud, que con cara atónita, labios
entreabiertos y ojos espantados, miraba desfilar con asombro á todo lo
mejor de la nobleza castellana, rodeada en aquella ocasión de un
fausto y un esplendor fabulosos.

Luego, poco á poco fué cesando el ruido y la animación; los vidrios de
colores de las altas ojivas del palacio dejaron de brillar; atravesó
por entre los apiñados grupos la última cabalgata; la gente del pueblo
á su vez comenzó á dispersarse en todas direcciones, perdiéndose entre
las sombras del enmarañado laberinto de calles obscuras, estrechas y
torcidas,[1] y ya no turbaba el profundo silencio de la noche más que
el grito lejano de vela de algún guerrero, el rumor de los pasos de
algún curioso que se retiraba el último, ó el ruido que producían las
aldabas de algunas puertas al cerrarse, cuando en lo alto de la
escalinata que conducía á la plataforma del palacio apareció un
caballero, el cual, después de tender la vista por todos lados como
buscando á alguien que debía esperarle, descendió lentamente hasta la
cuesta del alcázar, por la que se dirigie hacia el Zocodover.

  [Footnote 1: torcidas. See p. 50, note 2.]

Al llegar á la plaza de éste nombre se detuvo un momento, y volvió á
pasear la mirada á su alrededor. La noche estaba obscura; no brillaba
una sola estrella en el cielo, ni en toda la plaza se veía una sola
luz; no obstante, allá á lo lejos, y en la misma dirección en que
comenzó á percibirse un ligero ruido como de pasos que iban
aproximándose, creyó distinguir el bulto de un hombre: era sin duda el
mismo á quien parecía[1] aguardaba con tanta impaciencia.

  [Footnote 1: parecía is parenthetic in sense as used here.]

El caballero que acababa de abandonar el alcázar para dirigirse al
Zocodover era Alonso Carrillo, que en razón al puesto de honor que
desempeñaba cerca de la persona del rey, había tenido que acompañarle
en su cámara hasta aquellas horas. El que saliendo de entre las
sombras de los arcos[1] que rodean la plaza vino á reunírsele, Lope de
Sandoval. Cuando los dos caballeros se hubieron reunido, cambiaron
algunas frases en voz baja.

  [Footnote 1: arcos. See p. 64, note 1.]

--Presumí que me aguardabas, dijo el uno.

--Esperaba que lo presumirías, contesto el otro.

--Y ¿á dónde iremos?

--Á cualquiera parte en que se puedan hallar cuatro palmos de terreno
donde revolverse, y un rayo de claridad que nos alumbre.

Terminado este brevísimo diálogo, los dos jóvenes se internaron por
una de las estrechas calles que desembocan en el Zocodover,
desapareciendo en la obscuridad como esos fantasmas de la noche, que
después de aterrar un instante al que los ve, se deshacen en átomos de
niebla y se confunden en el seno de las sombras.

Largo rato anduvieron dando vueltas á través de las calles de Toledo,
buscando un lugar á propósito para terminar sus diferencias; pero la
obscuridad de la noche era tan profunda, que el duelo parecía
imposible. No obstante, ambos deseaban batirse, y batirse antes que
rayase el alba; pues al amanecer debían partir las huestes reales, y
Alonso con ellas. Prosiguieron, pues, cruzando al azar plazas
desiertas, pasadizos sombríos, callejones estrechos y tenebrosos,
hasta que por último, vieron brillar á lo lejos una luz, una luz
pequeña y moribunda, en torno de la cual la niebla formaba un cerco de
claridad fantástica y dudosa.

Habían llegado á la calle del Cristo,[1] y la luz que se divisaba en
uno de sus extremes parecía ser la del farolillo que alumbraba en
aquella época, y alumbra aún, á la imagen que le da su nombre. Al
verla, ambos dejaron escapar una exclamación de júbilo, y apresurando
el paso en su dirección, no tardaron mucho en encontrarse junto al
retablo en que ardía. Un arco rehundido en el muro, en el fondo del
cual se veía la imagen del Redentor enclavado en la cruz y con una
calavera al pie; un tosco cobertizo de tablas que lo defendía de la
intemperie, y el pequeño farolillo colgado de una cuerda que lo
iluminaba débilmente, vacilando al impulse del aire, formaban todo el
retablo, alrededor del cual colgaban algunos festones de hiedra que
habían crecido entre los obscuros y rotos sillares, formando una
especie de pabellón de verdura.

  [Footnote 1: la calle del Cristo. The street mentioned here is one
  known up to the year 1864 as _la Calle del Cristo de la Calavera_ or
  _la Calle de la Calavera_, but which bears to-day the name of _la
  Cuesta del Pez_. It terminates near a little square which is called
  to-day _Plazuela de Abdon de Paz_, but which earlier bore the name
  of _Plazuela de la Cruz de la Calavera_. Miraculous tales are
  related of several of the images of Christ in Toledo, of the _Cristo
  de la Luz_, of the _Cristo de la Vega_, and others, as well as of
  the image we have to deal with here.]

Los caballeros, después de saludar respetuosamente la imagen de
Cristo, quitándose los birretes y murmurando en voz baja una corta
oración, reconocieron el terreno con una ojeada, echaron á tierra sus
mantos, y apercibiéndose mutuamente para el combate y dándose la señal
con un leve movimiento de cabeza, cruzaron los estoques. Pero apenas
se habían tocado los aceros y antes que ninguno de los combatientes
hubiese podido dar un solo paso ó intentar un golpe, la luz se
apagó[1] de repente y la calle quedó sumida en la obscuridad más
profunda. Como guiados de un mismo pensamiento y al verse rodeados de
repentinas tinieblas, los dos combatientes dieron un paso atrás,
bajaron al suelo las puntas de sus espadas y levantaron los ojos hacia
el farolillo, cuya luz, momentos antes apagada, volvió á brillar de
nuevo al punto en que hicieron ademán de suspender la pelea.

  [Footnote 1: la luz se apagó. Espronceda describes effectively a
  similar miraculous extinguishing and relighting of a lamp before a
  shrine, in Part IV of his _Estudiante de Salamanca_:

    La moribunda lámpara que ardía
    Trémula lanza su postrer fulgor,
    Y en honda obscuridad, noche sombría
    La misteriosa calle encapotó.

    Al pronunciar tan insolente ultraje
    La lámpara del Cristo se encendió:
    Y una mujer velada en blanco traje,
    Ante la imagen de rodillas vió.

    Y al rostro la acerca, que el cándido lino
    Encubre, con ánimo asaz descortés;
    Mas la luz apaga viento repentino,
    Y la blanca dama se puso de pie.
  ]

--Será alguna ráfaga de aire que ha abatido la llama al pasar, exclamó
Carrillo volviendo á ponerse en guardia, y previniendo con una voz á
Lope, que parecía preocupado.

Lope dió un paso adelante para recuperar el terreno perdido, tendió el
brazo y los aceros se tocaron otra vez; mas al tocarse, la luz se
tornó á apagar por sí misma, permaneciendo así mientras no se
separaron los estoques.

--En verdad que esto es extraño, murmuró Lope mirando al farolillo,
que espontaneamente habia vuelto á encenderse, y se mecía con lentitud
en el aire, derramando una claridad trémula y extraña sobre el
amarillo craneo de la calavera colocada a los pies de Cristo.

--¡Bah! dijo Alonso, será que la beata encargada de cuidar del farol
del retablo sisa á los devotos y escasea el aceite, por lo cual la
luz, proxima á morir, luce y se obscurece á intervalos en señal de
agonía; y dichas estas palabras, el impetuoso joven tornó á colocarse
en actitud de defensa. Su contrario le imitó; pero esta vez, no tan
sólo volvió á rodearlos una sombra espesisima é impenetrable, sino que
al mismo tiempo hirió sus oídos el eco profundo de una voz misteriosa,
semejante á esos largos gemidos del vendaval que parece que se queja y
articula palabras al correr aprisionado por las torcidas, estrechas y
tenebrosas calles de Toledo.

Que dijo aquella voz medrosa y sobrehumana, nunca pudo saberse; pero
al oirla ambos jóvenes se sintieron poseídos de tan profundo terror,
que las espadas se escaparon de sus manos, el cabello se les erizó, y
por sus cuerpos, que estremecía un temblor involuntario, y por sus
frentes pálidas y descompuestas, comenzó á correr un sudor frío como
el de la muerte.

La luz, por tercera vez apagada, por tercera vez volvió á resucitar, y
las tinieblas se disiparon.

--¡Ah! exclamó Lope al ver á su contrario entonces, y en otros días su
mejor amigo, asombrado como él, y como él pálido é inmóvil; Dios no
quiere permitir este combate, porque es una lucha fratricida; porque
un combate entre nosotros ofende al cielo, ante el cual nos hemos
jurado cien veces una amistad eterna. Y esto diciendo se arrojó en los
brazos de Alonso, que le estrechó entre los suyos con una fuerza y una
efusión indecibles.




III


Pasados algunos minutos, durante los cuales ambos jovenes se dieron
toda clase de muestras de amistad y cariño, Alonso tomó la palabra, y
con acento conmovido aún por la escena que acabamos de referir,
exclamó, dirigiendose á su amigo:

--Lope, yo se que amas á doña Inés; ignoro si tanto como yo, pero la
amas. Puesto que un duelo entre nosotros es imposible, resolvámonos á
encomendar nuestra suerte en sus manos. Vamos en su busca; que ella
decida con libre albedrío cuál ha de ser el dichoso, cuál el infeliz.
Su decisión será respetada por ambos, y el que no merezca sus favores
mañana saldrá con el rey de Toledo, é irá á buscar el consuelo del
olvido en la agitación de la guerra.

--Pues tú lo quieres, sea; contestó Lope.

Y el uno apoyado en el brazo del otro, los dos amigos se dirigieron
hacia la catedral,[1] en cuya plaza,[2] y en un palacio del que ya no
quedan ni aún los restos, habitaba doña Inés de Tordesillas.

  [Footnote 1: la catedral. See p. 55, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: plaza. There is a small square in front of the
  cathedral, called to-day the _Plaza de_ (or _del_) _Ayuntamiento_.]

Estaba á punto de rayar el alba, y como algunos de los deudos de doña
Inés, sus hermanos entre ellos, marchaban al otro día con el ejército
real, no era imposible que en las primeras horas de la mañana pudiesen
penetrar en su palacio.

Animados con esta esperanza, llegaron, en fin, al pie de la gótica
torre[1] del templo; mas al llegar á aquel punto, un ruido particular
llamó su atención, y deteniéndose en uno de los ángulos, ocultos entre
las sombras de los altos machones que flanquean los muros, vieron, no
sin grande asombro, abrirse el balcón del palacio de su dama, aparecer
en él un hombre que se deslizó hasta el suelo con la ayuda de una
cuerda, y, por último, una forma blanca, doña Inés sin duda, que
inclinándose sobre el calado antepecho, cambió algunas tiernas frases
de despedida con su misterioso galán.

  [Footnote 1: la gotica torre. See p. 55, note i.]

El primer movimiento de los dos jóvenes fué llevar las manos al puño
de sus espadas; pero deteniéndose como heridos de una idea súbita,
volvieron los ojos á mirarse, y se hubieron de encontrar con una cara
de asombro tan cómica, que ambos prorrumpieron en una ruidosa
carcajada, carcajada que, repitiéndose de eco en el silencio de la
noche, resonó en toda la plaza y llego hasta el palacio.

Al oirla, la forma blanca desapareció del balcón, se escuchó el ruido
de las puertas que se cerraron con violencia, y todo volvió á quedar
en silencio.

Al día siguiente, la reina, colocada en un estrado lujosísimo, veía
desfilar las huestes que marchaban á la guerra de moros, teniendo á su
lado las damas más principales de Toledo. Entre ellas estaba doña Inés
de Tordesillas, en la que aquel día, como siempre, se fijaban todos
los ojos; pero según á ella le parecía advertir, con diversa expresión
que la de costumbre. Diriase que en todas las curiosas miradas que á
ella se volvían, retozaba una sonrisa burlona.

Este descubrimiento no dejaba de inquietarla algo, sobre todo teniendo
en cuenta las ruidosas carcajadas que la noche anterior había creído
percibir á lo lejos y en uno de los ángulos de la plaza, cuando
cerraba el balcón y despedia á su amante; pero al mirar aparecer entre
las filas de los combatientes, que pasaban por debajo del estrado
lanzando chispas de fuego de sus brillantes armaduras, y envueltos en
una nube de polvo, los pendones reunidos de las casas de Carrillo y
Sandoval; al ver la significativa sonrisa que al saludar á la reina le
dirigieron los dos antiguos rivales que cabalgaban juntos, todo lo
adivinó, y la púrpura de la vergüenza enrojeció su frente, y brilló en
sus ojos una lágrima de despecho.




EL BESO


I


Cuando una parte del ejército francés se apodero á principios de este
siglo[1] de la historica Toledo,[2] sus jefes, que no ignoraban el
peligro á que se exponían en las poblaciones españolas diseminándose
en alojamientos separados, comenzaron por habilitar para cuarteles los
más grandes y mejores edificios de la ciudad.

  [Footnote 1: una parte... siglo. The French armies of Napoleon
  entered Spain in 1808. Joseph Bonaparte was declared king, but the
  opposition of Spain was most heroic, and in 1814 the French were
  expelled. They made great havoc in Toledo, where among other
  desecrations they burned the Alcazar (now restored) and the convent
  church of San Juan de los Reyes.]

  [Footnote 2: Toledo. See p. 50, note 2.]

Después de ocupado el suntuoso alcázar[1] de Carlos V, [Footnote:2]
echóse mano de la casa de Consejos;[3] y cuando ésta no pudo contener
más gente, comenzaron á invadir el asilo de las comunidades
religiosas, acabando á la postre por transformar en cuadras hasta las
iglesias consagradas al culto. En esta conformidad se encontraban las
cosas en la población donde tuvo lugar el suceso que voy á referir,
cuando, una noche, ya á hora hastante avanzada, envueltos en sus
obscures capotes de guerra y ensordeciendo las estrechas y solitarias
calles que conducen desde la Puerta del Sol[4] á Zocodover,[5] con el
choque de sus armas y el ruidoso golpear de los cascos de sus corceles
que sacaban chispas de los pedernales, entraron en la ciudad hasta
unos cien dragones de aquellos altos, arrogantes y fornidos, de que
todavía nos hablan con admiración nuestras abuelas.

  [Footnote 1: alcázar. See p. 61, note 3.]

  [Footnote 2: Carlos V. Charles V, the son of Philip of Burgundy by
  Joanna (daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella), and grandson of the
  emperor Maximilian 1, was bom at Ghent, Flanders, February 24,1500,
  and died in the monastery of Yuste, Estremadura, Spain, September
  21, 1558. He became king of Spain (as Charles 1) in 1516, and
  emperor in 1520. In 1556 he abdicated the government of the former
  in favor of his son Philip II, and of the latter in favor of his
  brother Ferdinand I.]

  [Footnote 3: la casa de Consejos. The _Casa de_ Consejos ('City
  Hall'), _Casa Consistorial_, or _Ayuntamiento_, by which various
  names it is known, is a building erected in the fifteenth century
  and remodeled in the seventeenth. It has a handsome Greco-Roman
  façade in striking' contrast with the Gothic architecture of the
  cathedral, which stands upon the same plaza (see p. 73, note 2).]

  [Footnote 4: la Puerta del Sol. A charming old Moorish gateway with
  horseshoe arches between two towers, built about 1100, and recently
  restored. It is one of the most impressive and beautiful of Toledo's
  monuments.]

  [Footnote 5: Zocodover. See p. 64, note 1.]

Mandaba la fuerza un oficial bastante joven, el cual iba como á
distancia de unos treinta pasos de su gente hablando á media voz con
otro, también militar á lo que podía colegirse por su traje. Éste, que
caminaba á pie delante de su interlocutor, llevando en la mano un
farolillo, parecía servirle de guía por entre aquel laberinto de
calles obscuras, enmarañadas y revueltas.

--Con verdad, decía el jinete á su acompañante, que si el alojamiento
que se nos prepara es tal y como me lo pintas, casi casi sería
preferible arrancharnos en el campo ó en medio de una plaza.

--¿Y qué queréis, mi capitán? contestóle el guía que efectivamente era
un sargento aposentador; en el alcázar no cabe ya un grano de trigo
cuanto mas un hombre; de San Juan de los Reyes[1] no digamos, porque
hay celda de fraile en la que duermen quince húsares. El convento á
donde voy á conduciros no era mal local, pero hará cosa de tres ó
cuatro días nos cayó aquí como de las nubes ima de las columnas
volantes que recorren la provincia, y gracias que hemos podido
conseguir que se amontonen por los claustros y dejen libre la iglesia.

  [Footnote 1: San Juan de los Reyes. This convent was founded in 1476
  by Ferdinand and Isabella, who meant it to be their burial-place,
  and was dedicated to their patron saint John the Baptist. "After the
  capture of Granada in 1492 and the foundation of the royal mausoleum
  there, the chief object of San Juan disappeared and the building was
  protracted till the seventeenth century. Thus the edifice, begun in
  the late Gothic style, shows a strong leaning towards the forms of
  the Renaissance. The interior was much damaged by the French in
  1808." Baedeker's _Spain_ (1901), p. 147.]

--En fin, exclamó el oficial después de un corto silencio y como
resignándose con el extraño alojamiento que la casualidad le
deparaba,--más vale incómodo que ninguno. De todas maneras, si llueve,
que no será dificil según se agrupan las nubes, estaremos á cubierto y
algo es algo.

Interrumpida la conversación en este punto, los jinetes, precedidos
del guía, siguieron en silencio el camino adelante hasta llegar á una
plazuela, en cuyo fondo se destacaba la negra silueta del convento con
su torre morisca, su campanario de espadaña, su cúpula ojival y sus
tejados de crestas desiguales y obscuras.

--He aquí vuestro alojamiento, exclamó el aposentador al divisarle y
dirigiéndose al capitán, que después que hubo mandado hacer alto á la
tropa, ecbó pie á tierra, tomó el farolillo de manos del guía, y se
dirigió hacia el punto que este le señalaba.

Como quiera que la iglesia del convento estaba completamente
desmantelada, los soldados que ocupaban el resto del edificio habían
creído que las puertas le eran ya poco menos que inútiles, y un
tablero hoy, otro mañana, habían ido arrancandolas pedazo á pedazo
para hacer hogueras con que calentarse por las noches.

Nuestro joven oficial no tuvo, pues, que torcer Haves ni descorrer
cerrojos para penetrar en el interior del templo.

Á la luz del farolillo, cuya dudosa claridad se perdía entre las
espesas sombras de las naves y dibujaba con gigantescas proporciones
sobre el muro la fantástica sombra del sargento aposentador que iba
precediéndole, recorrió la iglesia de arriba abajo y escudriñó una por
una todas sus desiertas capillas, hasta que una vez hecho cargo del
local, mandó echar pie á tierra á su gente, y hombres y caballos
revueltos, fué acomodándola como mejor pudo.

Según dejamos dicho, la iglesia estaba completamente desmantelada; en
el altar mayor pendían aún de las alias cornisas los rotos jirones del
velo con que le habían cubierto los religiosos al abandonar aquel
recinto; diseminados por las naves veianse algunos retablos adosados
al muro, sin imágenes en las hornacinas; en el coro se 'dibujaban con
un ribete de luz los extraños perfiles de la obscura sillería de
alerce; en el pavimento, destrozado en varies puntos, distinguíanse
aún anchas losas sepulcrales llenas de timbres, escudos y largas
inscripciones góticas; y allá á lo lejos, en el fondo de las
silenciosas capillas y á lo largo del crucero, se destacaban
confusamente entre la obscuridad, semejantes á blancos é inmóviles
fantasmas, las estatuas de piedra que, unas tendidas, otras de hinojos
sobre el mármol de sus tumbas, parecían ser los únicos habitantes del
ruinoso edificio.

Á cualquiera otro menos molido que el oficial de dragones, el cual
traía una jornada de catorce leguas en el cuerpo, ó menos acostumbrado
á ver estos sacrilegios como la cosa más natural del mundo, hubiéranle
bastado dos adarmes de imaginación para no pegar los ojos en toda la
noche en aquel obscuro é imponente recinto, donde las blasfemias de
los soldados que se quejaban en alta voz del improvisado cuartel, el
metálico golpe de sus espuelas que resonaban sobre las antes losas
sepulcrales del navimento, el ruido de los caballos que piafaban
impacientes, cabeceando y haciendo sonar las cadenas con que estaban
sujetos á los pilares, formaban un rumor extraño y temeroso que se
dilataba por todo el ámbito de la iglesia y se reproducía cada vez más
confuso repetido de eco en eco en sus alias bóvedas.

Pero nuestro héroe, aunque joven, estaba ya tan familiarizado con
estas peripecias de la vida de campaña, que apenas hubo acomodado á su
gente, mandó colocar un saco de forraje al pie de la grada del
presbiterio, y arrebujándose como mejor pudo en su capote y echando la
cabeza en el escalón, á los cinco minutos roncaba con más tranquilidad
que el mismo rey José[1] en su palacio de Madrid.[2]

  [Footnote 1: rey José. Joseph Bonaport. See p. 76, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: Madrid. The capital of Spain and of the province of
  Madrid, situated on the Manzanares, and nearly in the geographical
  center of Spain. Population some 540,000. The royal palace, begun in
  1737, is an imposing rectangular structure on a lofty terrace
  overlooking the Manzanares.]

Los soldados, haciendose almohadas de las monturas, imitaron su
ejemplo, y poco á poco fué apagándose el murmullo de sus voces.

Á la media hora sólo se oían los ahogados gemidos del aire que entraba
por las rotas vidrieras de las ojivas del templo, el atolondrado
revolotear de las aves nocturnas que tenían sus nidos en el dosel de
piedra de las esculturas dé los muros, y el alternado rumor de los
pasos del vigilante que se paseaba envuelto en los anchos pliegues de
su capote, á lo largo del pórtico.




II


En la época á que se remonta la relación de esta historia, tan
verídica como extraordinaria, lo mismo que al presente, para los que
no sabían apreciar los tesoros del arte que encierran sus muros la
ciudad de Toledo no era mas que un poblacón destartalado, antiguo,
ruinoso é insufrible.

Los oficiales del ejército francés, que á juzgar por los actos de
vandalismo[1] con que dejaron en ella triste y perdurable memoria de
su ocupación, de todo tenían menos de artistas ó arqueólogos, no hay
para que decir que se fastidiaban soberanamente en la vetusta ciudad
de los Césares.[2]

  [Footnote 1: vandalismo. See p. 76, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: ciudad de los Césares. See p. 50, note 2, and p. 52,
  note 1.]

En esta situación de ánimo, la más insignificante novedad que viniese
á romper la monótona quietud de aquellos días eternos é iguales, era
acogida con avidez entre los ociosos; así es que la promoción al grado
inmediato de uno de sus camaradas, la noticia del movimiento
estratégico de una columna volante, la salida de un correo de
gabinete, ó la llegada de una fuerza cualquiera á la ciudad,
convertíanse en tema fecundo de conversación y objeto de toda clase de
comentarios, hasta tanto que otro incidente venía á sustituirle,[1]
sirviendo de base á nuevas quejas, críticas y suposiciones.

  [Footnote 1: sustituirle. See p. 66, note 1.]

Como era de esperar, entre los oficiales que, según tenían de
costumbre, acudieron al día siguiente á tomar el sol y á charlar un
rato en el Zocodover, no se hizo platillo de otra cosa que de la
llegada de los dragones, cuyo jefe dejamos en el anterior capítulo
durmiendo á pierna suelta y descansando de las fatigas de su viaje.
Cerca de una hora hacía que la conversación giraba alrededor de este
asunto, y ya comenzaba á interpretarse de diversos modos la ausencia
del recién venido, á quien uno de los presentes, antiguo compañero
suyo de colegio, habia citado para el Zocodover, cuando en una de las
boca-calles de la plaza apareció al fin nuestro bizarro capitán
despojado de su ancho capotón de guerra, luciendo un gran casco de
metal con penacho de plumas blancas, una casaca azul turquí con
vueltas rojas y un magnífico mandoble con vaina de acero, que resonaba
arrastrándose al compás de sus marciales pasos y del golpe seco y
agudo de sus espuelas de oro.

Apenas le vió su camarada, salió á su encuentro para saludarle, y con
él se adelantaron casi todos los que á la sazón se encontraban en el
corrillo; en quienes habían despertado la curiosidad y la gana de
conocerle, los pormenores que ya habían oído referir acerca de su
carácter original y extraño.

Después de los estrechos abrazos de costumbre y de las exclamaciones,
plácemes y preguntas de rigor en estas entrevistas; después de hablar
largo y tendido sobre las novedades que andaban por Madrid, la varia
fortuna de la guerra y los amigotes muertos ó ausentes, rodando de uno
en otro asunto la conversación, vino á parar al tema obligado, esto
es, las penalidades del servicio, la falta de distracciones de la
ciudad y el inconveniente de los alojamientos.

Al llegar á este punto, uno de los de la reunión que, por lo visto,
tenía noticia del mal talante con que el joven oficial se había
resignado á acomodar su gente en la abandonada iglesia, le dijo con
aire de zumba:

--Y á propósito de alojamiento, ¿qué tal se ha pasado la noche en el
que ocupáis?

--Ha habido de todo, contestó el interpelado; pues si bien es verdad
que no he dormido gran cosa, el origen de mi vigilia merece la pena de
la velada. El insomnio junto á una mujer bonita no es seguramente el
peor de los males.

--¡Una mujer! repitió su interlocutor como admirándose de la buena
fortuna del recién venido; eso es lo que se llama llegar y besar el
santo.

--Será tal vez algún antiguo amor de la corte que le sigue á Toledo
para hacerle más soportable el ostracismo, añadió otro de los del
grupo.

--¡Oh! no, dijo entonces el capitán; nada menos que eso. Juro, á fe de
quien soy, que no la conocía y que nunca creí hallar tan bella patrona
en tan incómódo alojamiento. Es todo lo que se llama una verdadera
aventura.

--¡Contadla! ¡contadla! exclamaron en coro los oficiales que rodeaban
al capitán; y como éste se dispusiera á hacerlo así, todos prestaron
la mayor atención á sus palabras, mientras él comenzó la historia en
estos terminos:

--Dormía esta noche pasada como duerme un hombre que trae en el cuerpo
trece[1] leguas de camino, cuando he aquí que en lo mejor del sueño me
hizo despertar sobresaltado é incorporarme sobre el codo un estruendo
horrible, un estruendo tal, que me ensordeció un instante para dejarme
después los oídos zumbando cerca de un minuto, como si un moscardón me
cantase á la oreja.

  [Footnote 1: trece = 'thirteen.' Our author has told us on p. 79
  that it was catorce ('fourteen').]

Como os habrás figurado, la causa de mi susto era el primer golpe que
oía de esa endiablada campana gorda,[1] especie de sochantre de
bronce, que los canónigos de Toledo han colgado en su catedral con el
laudable propósito de matar á disgustos a los necesitados de reposo.

  [Footnote 1: campana gorda = 'great bell.' The famous _Campana
  Gorda_, weighing nearly two tons, was cast by Alejandro Gargollo in
  1753. It hangs in the cathedral tower surrounded by eight other
  bells, and surmounted by two more.]

Renegando entre dientes de la campana y del campanero que la toca,
disponíame, una vez apagado aquel insólito y temeroso rumor, á coger
nuevamente el hilo del interrumpido sueño, cuando vino á herir mi
imaginación y á ofrecerse ante mis ojos una cosa extraordinaria. Á la
dudosa luz de la luna que entraba en el templo por el estrecho ajimez
del muro de la capilla mayor, ví una mujer arrodillada junto al altar.

Los oficiales se miraron éntre sí con expresion entre asombrada é
incrédula; el capitán, sin atender al efecto que su narración
producía, continuó de este modo:

--No podéis figuraros nada semejante á aquella nocturna y fantástica
visión que se dibujaba confusamente en la penumbra de la capilla como
esas virgenes pintadas en los vidrios de colores que habréis visto
alguna vez destacarse á lo lejos, blancas y luminosas, sobre el
obscuro fondo de las catedrales.

Su rostro ovalado, en donde se veía impreso el sello de una leve y
espiritual demacración, sus armoniosas facciones llenas de una suave y
melancólica dulzura; su intensa palidez, las purisimas líneas de su
contorno esbelto, su ademán reposado y noble, su traje blanco y
flotante, me traían á la memoria esas mujeres que yo soñaba cuando
casi era un niño. ¡Castas y celestes imágenes, quimérico objeto del
vago amor de la adolescencia! Yo me creía juguete de una alucinación,
y sin quitarle un punto los ojos, ni aún osaba respirar, temiendo que
un soplo desvaneciese el encanto. Ella permanecía inmóvil.

Antojábaseme al verla tan diáfana y luminosa que no era una criatura
terrenal, sino un espíritu que, revistiendo por un instante la forma
humana, había descendido en el rayo de la luna, dejando en el aire y
en pos de sí la azulada estela que desde el alto ajimez bajaba
verticalmente hasta el pie del opuesto muro, rompiendo la obscura
sombra de aquel recinto lóbrego y misterioso.

--Pero ... exclamó interrumpiéndole su camarada de colegio, que,
comenzando por echar á broma la historia, había concluido
interesándose con su relato: ¿cómo estaba allí aquella mujer? ¿No
la[1] dijiste nada? ¿No te explicó su presencia en aquel sitio?

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

--No me determiné á hablarla,[1] porque estaba seguro de que no había
de contestarme, ni verme ni oirme.

  [Footnote 1: la. See p. 20, note 2.]

--¿Era sorda?

--¿Era ciega?

--¿Era muda? exclamaron á un tiempo tres ó cuatro de los que
escuchaban la relación.

--Lo era todo á la vez, exclame al fin el capitán después de un
momento de pausa; porque era... de mármol. Al oir el estupendo
desenlace de tan extraiía aventura, cuantos había en el corro
prorrumpieron en una ruidosa carcajada, mientras uno de ellos dijo al
narrador de la peregrina historia, que era el único que permanecía
callado y en una grave actitud:

--¡Acabáramos de una vez! Lo que es de ese género, tengo yo más de un
millar, un verdadero serrallo, en San Juan de los Reyes; serrallo que
desde ahora pongo á vuestra disposición, ya que, á lo que parece,
tanto os da de una mujer de carne como de piedra.

--¡Oh! no ... continuó el capitán, sin alterarse en lo más mínimo por
las carcajadas de sus compañeros: estoy seguro de que no pueden ser
como la mía. La mía es una verdadera dama castellana que por un
milagro de la escultura parece que no la han enterrado en un sepulcro,
sino que aún permanece en cuerpo y alma de hinojos sobre la losa que
le cubre, inmóvil, con las manos juntas en ademan suplicante,
sumergida en un éxtasis de místico amor.

--De tal modo te explicas, que acabarás por probarnos la verosimilitud
de la fábula de Galatea.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Galatea. In the story told by Ovid (_Met._ x. 243)
  Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, conceived an aversion to women, and
  devoted himself to art, but having made in ivory a lovely statue of
  a woman he became enamored of it, and at his request Aphrodite
  endowed it with life. This beautiful woman, Galatea, became his
  wife, and bore him a son called Paphos, founder of the city of that
  name in Cyprus.]

--Por mi parte, puedo deciros que siempre la creí una locura; mas
desde anoche comienzo á comprender la pasión del escultor griego.

--Dadas las especiales condiciones de tu nueva dama, creo que, no
tendrás inconveniente en presentarnos á ella. De mí sé decir que ya no
vivo hasta ver esa maravilla. Pero ... ¿qué diantres te pasa? ...
diríase que esquivas la presentación. ¡Já! ¡já! ¡já! Bonito fuera que
ya te tuviéramos hasta celoso.

--Celoso, se apresuró á decir el capitán, celoso ... de los hombres no
... mas ved, sin embargo, hasta donde llega mi extravagancia. Junto á
la imagen de esa mujer, también de mármol, grave y al parecer con vida
como ella, hay un guerrero, ... su marido sin duda.... Pues bien ...
lo voy á decir todo, aunque os moféis de mi necedad ... si no hubiera
temido que me tratasen de loco, creo que ya lo habría hecho cien veces
pedazos.

Una nueva y aún más ruidosa carcajada de los oficiales saludó esta
original revelación del estrambótico enamorado de la dama de piedra.

--Nada, nada; es preciso que la veamos, decían los unos.

--Si, si, es preciso saber si el objeto corresponde á tan alta pasión,
añadian los otros.

--¿Cuando nos reuniremos á echar un trago en la iglesia en que os
alojáis? exclamaron los demás.

--Cuando mejor os parezca: esta misma noche si queréis, respondió el
joven capitán, recobrando su habitual sonrisa, disipada un instante
por aquel relámpago de celos.--Á propósito. Con los bagajes he traído
hasta un par de docenas de botellas de _Champagne_, verdadero
_Champagne_, restos de un regalo hecho á nuestro general de brigada,
que, como sabéis, es algo pariente.

¡Bravo! ¡bravo! exclamaron los oficiales á una voz, prorrumpiendo en
alegres exclamaciones.

--¡Se bebera vino del país![1]

  [Footnote 1: vino del país = 'wine from home,' 'wine from our own
  country.']

--¡Y cantaremos una canción de Ronsard![1]

  [Footnote 1: Ronsard. A celebrated French poet of the sixteenth
  century (b. 1524, d. 1585) and father of lyric poetry in France.]

--Y hablaremos de mujeres, á proposito de la dama del anfitrión.

--Conque ... ¡hasta la noche!

--Hasta la noche.




III


Ya hacía largo rato que los pacíficos habitantes de Toledo habían
cerrado con llave y cerrojo las pesadas puertas de sus antiguos
caserones; la campana gorda de la catedral anunciaba la hora de la
queda, y en lo alto del alcázar, convertido en cuartel, se oía el
ultimo toque de silencio de los clarines, cuando diez ó doce oficiales
que poco á poco habían ido reuniéndose en el Zocodover, tomaron el
camino que conduce desde aquel punto al convento en que se alojaba el
capitán, animados más con la esperanza de apurar las prometidas
botellas, que con el deseo de conocer la-maravillosa escultura.

La noche había cerrado sombría y amenazadora; el cielo estaba cubierto
de nubes de color de plomo; el aire, que zumbaba encarcelado en las
estrechas y retorcidas calles, agitaba la moribunda luz del farolillo
de los retablos, ó hacia girar con un chirrido agudo las veletas de
hierro de las torres.

Apenas los oficiales dieron vista á la plaza en que se hallaba situado
el alojamiento de su nuevo amigo, este, que les aguardaba impaciente,
salió á encontrarles; y después de cambiar algunas palabras á media
voz, todos penetraron juntos en la iglesia, en cuyo lóbrego recinto la
escasa claridad de una linterna luchaba trabajosamente con las
obscuras y espesísimas sombras.

--¡Por quien soy! exclamo uno de los convidados tendiendo a su
alrededor la vista, que el local es de los menos aproposito del mundo
para una fiesta.

--Efectivamente, dijo otro; nos traes á conocer á una dama, y apenas
si con mucha dificultad se ven los dedos de la mano.

--Y sobre todo, hace un frío, que no parece sino que estamos en la
Siberia,[1] añadió un tercero arrebujándose en el capote.

  [Footnote 1: Siberia. A vast region in northern and central Asia,
  which forms part of the Russian empire, and which has by far the
  lowest winter temperatures of the known world.]

--Calma, señores, calma, interrumpió el anfitrión; calma, que á todo.
se proveerá. ¡Eh, muchacho! prosiguió dirigiéndose á uno de sus
asistentes; busca por ahí un poco de leña, y enciéndenos una buena
fogata en la capilla mayor.

El asistente, obedeciendo las órdenes de su capitán, comenzó á
descargar golpes en la sillería del coro, y después que hubo reunido
una gran cantidad de leña que fué apilando al pie de las gradas del
presbiterio, tomó la linterna y se dispuso á hacer un auto de fe con
aquellos fragmentos tallados de riquísimas labores entre los que se
veían por aquí parte de una columnilla salomónica, por allá la imagen
de un santo abad, el torso de una mujer, ó la disforme cabeza de un
grifo asomado entre hojarasca.

Á los pocos minutos, una gran claridad que de improviso se derramó por
todo el ámbito de la iglesia, anunció á los oficiales que había
llegado la hora de comenzar el festín.

El capitán, que hacía los honores de su alojamiento con la misma
ceremonia que hubiera hecho los de su casa, exclamó dirigiéndose á los
convidados:

--Si gustáis, pasaremos al _buffet_.[1]

  [Footnote 1: buffet. A French word meaning 'refreshment-table.' It
  is customary in France at large receptions and dancing-parties to
  install in some room a counter or table from which to serve
  refreshments. This is known as the _buffet_.]

Sus camaradas, afectando la mayor gravedad, respondieron á la
invitación con un cómico salido, y se encaminaron á la capilla mayor
precedidos del héroe de la fiesta, que al llegar á la escalinata se
detuvo un instante, y extendiendo la mano en dirección al sitio que
ocupaba la tumba, les dijo con la finura más exquisita:

--Tengo el placer de presentaros á la dama de mis pensamientos. Creo
que convendréis conmigo en que no he exagerado su belleza.

Los oficiales volvieron los ojos al punto que les señalaba su amigo, y
una exclamación de asombro se escapó involuntariamente de todos los
labios.

En el fondo de un arco sepulcral revestido de mármoles negros,
arrodillada delante de un reclinatorio, con las manos juntas y la cara
vuelta hacia el altar, vieron, en efecto, la imagen de una mujer tan
bella, que jamás salió otra igual de manos de un escultor, ni el deseo
pudo pintarla en la fantasía más soberanamente hermosa.

--En verdad que es un ángel, exclamó uno de ellos.

--¡Lástima que sea de mármol! añadió otro.

--No hay duda que aunque no sea más que la ilusión de hallarse junto á
una mujer de este calibre, es lo suficiente para no pegar los ojos en
toda la noche.

--¿Y no sabéis quién es ella? preguntaron algunos de los que
contemplaban la estatua al capitán, que sonreía satisfecho de su
triunfo.

--Recordando un poco del latín--que en mi niñez supe, he conseguido, á
duras penas, descifrar la inscripción de la tumba, contestó el
interpelado; y á lo que he podido colegir, pertenece á un título de
Castilla,[1] famoso guerrero que hizo la campaña con el Gran
Capitán.[2] Su nombre lo he olvidado; mas su esposa, que es la que
véis, se llama doña Elvira de Castañeda, y por mi fe que si la copia
se parece al original, debió ser la mujer más notable de su siglo.

  [Footnote 1: Castilla. See p. 34, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: el Gran Capitán. Gonzalo Fernández de Córdoba (b. 1453,
  d. 1515). A famous Spanish general, who served with distinction in
  the wars against Portugal and the Moors, and in several Italian
  campaigns.]

Después de estas breves explicaciones, los convidados, que no perdían
de vista al principal objeto de la reunión, procedieron á destapar
algunas de las botellas y sentándose alrededor de la lumbre, empezó á
andar el vino á la ronda.

Á medida que las libaciones se hacían más numerosas y frecuentes, y el
vapor del espumoso _Champagne_ comenzaba á trastornar las cabezas,
crecían la animación, el ruido y la algazara de los jóvenes, de los
cuales éstos arrojaban á los monjes de granito adosados en los pilares
los cascos de las botellas vacías, y aquellos cantaban á toda voz
canciones báquicas y escandalosas, mientras los de más allá
prorrumpían en carcajadas, batían las palmas en señal de aplauso, ó
disputaban entre sí con blasfemias y juramentos.

El capitán bebía en silencio como un desesperado y sin apartar los
ojos de la estatua de doña Elvira.

Iluminada por el rojizo resplandor de la hoguera, y á través del
confuso velo que la embriaguez había puesto delante de su vista,
parecíale que la marmórea imagen se transformaba áveces en una mujer
real; parecíale que entreabría los labios como murmurando una oración;
que se alzaba su pecho' como oprimido y sollozante; que cruzaba las
manos con más fuerza; que sus mejillas se coloreaban, en fin, como si
se ruborizase ante aquel sacrílego y repugnante espectáculo.

Los oficiales que advirtieron la taciturna tristeza de su camarada, le
sacaron del éxtasis en que se encontraba sumergido, y presentándole
una copa, exclamaron en coro:

--¡Vamos, brindad vos, que sois el único que no lo ha hecho en toda la
noche!

El joven tomó la copa, y poniéndose de pie y alzándola en alto, dijo
encarándose con la estatua del guerrero arrodillado junto á doña
Elvira:

--¡Brindo por el emperador,[1] y brindo por la fortuna de sus armas,
merced á las cuales hemos podido venir hasta el fondo de Castilla á
cortejarle su mujer, en su misma tumba, á un vencedor de Ceriñola![2]

  [Footnote 1: el emperador. Napoleon Bonaparte, born at Ajaccio,
  Corsica, August 15, 1769; died on the island of St. Helena, May 5,
  1821. At this time he was at the height of his power.]

  [Footnote 2: Ceriñola. At Cerignola, Italy, on April 28, 1503, the
  Spanish army under Gonzalo de Córdoba defeated the French under the
  Duc de Nemours, and gained for Spain the kingdom of Naples.]

Los militares acogieron el brindis con una salva de aplausos, y el
capitán, balanceándose, dio algunos pasos hacia el sepulcro.

--No... prosiguió dirigiéndose siempre á la estatua del guerrero, y
con esa sonrisa estúpida propia de la embriaguez ...no creas que te
tengo rencor alguno porque veo en tí un rival... al contrario, te
admiro como un marido paciente, ejemplo de longanimidad y mansedumbre,
y á mi vez quiero también ser generoso. Tú serias bebedor á fuer de
soldado... no se ha de decir que te he dejado morir de sed, viéndonos
vaciar veinte botellas... ¡toma!

Y esto diciendo llevóse la copa á los labios, y después de
humedecérselos con el licor que contenía, le arrojó el resto á la
cara, prorrumpiendo en una carcajada estrepitosa al ver como caía el
vino sobre la tumba goteando de las barbas de piedra del inmóvil
guerrero.

--¡Capitán! exclamó en aquel punto uno de sus camaradas en tono de
zumba, cuidado con lo que hacéis.... Mirad que esas bromas con la
gente de piedra suelen costar caras.... Acordaos de lo que aconteció á
los húsares del 5° en el monasterio de Poblet.[1] ... Los guerreros
del claustro dicen que pusieron mano una noche á sus espadas de
granito, y dieron que hacer á los que se entretenían en pintarles
bigotes con carbón.

  [Footnote 1: Poblet. A once celebrated Cistercien monastery,
  situated about midway between Lérida and Tarragona. It owes its name
  to a holy hermit, who, after suffering many persecutions at the
  hands of the Moors, was finally granted all the territory of
  Hardeta. "When the Christians reconquered the country in 1149, the
  body of Poblet was revealed to the Church by miraculous lights, in
  consequence of which Ramón Berenguer IV immediately built the
  convent... (which) became the Escorial of Aragon." (Ford,
  _Handbook_.) It was plundered and partly destroyed in 1822-1835, but
  the ruins are still beautiful and imposing. The following incident
  is not one of its well-known legends.]

Los jóvenes acogieron con grandes carcajadas esta ocurrencia; pero el
capitán sin hacer caso de sus lisas, continuó siempre fijo en la misma
idea:

--¿Creéis que yo le hubiera dado el vino á no saber que se tragaba al
menos el que le cayese en la boca? ... ¡Oh! ... ¡no! ... yo no creo
como vosotros que esas estatuas son un pedazo de marmól tan inerte hoy
como el día en que lo arrancaron de la cantera. Indudablemente el
artista, que es casi un dios, da á su obra un soplo de vida que no
logra hacer que ande y se mueva, pero que le infunde una vida
incomprensible y extraña; vida que yo no me explico bien, pero que la
siento, sobre todo cuando bebo un poco.

--¡Magnífico! exclamaron sus camaradas, bebe y prosigue. El oficial
bebió, y fijando los ojos en la imagen de doña Elvira, prosiguió con
una exaltación creciente:

--¡Miradla! ... ¡miradla! ... ¿No véis esos cambiantes rojos de sus
carnes mórbidas y transparentes? ... ¿No parece que por debajo de esa
ligera epidermis azulada y suave de alabastro circula un flúido de luz
de color de rosa? ... ¿Queréis más vida? ... ¿Queréis más realidad?
...

--¡Oh! sí, seguramente, dijo uno de los que le escuchaban; quisiéramos
que fuese de carne y hueso.

--¡Carne y hueso! ... ¡Miseria, podredumbre! ... exclamo el capitán.
Yo he sentido en una orgía arder mis labios y mi cabeza; yo he sentido
este fuego que corre por las venas hirviente como la lava de un
volcán, cuyos vapores caliginosos turban y trastornan el cerebro y
hacen ver visiones extrañas. Entonces el beso de esas mujeres
materiales me quemaba como un hierro candente, y las apartaba de mí
con disgusto, con horror, hasta con asco; porque entonces, como ahora,
necesitaba un soplo de 'brisa del mar para mi frente calurosa, beber
hielo y besar nieve... nieve teñida de suave luz, nieve coloreada por
un dorado rayo de sol... una mujer blanca, hermosa y fría, como esa
mujer de piedra que parece incitarme con su fantástica hermosura, que
parece que oscila al compás de la llama, y me provoca entreabriendo
sus labios y ofréciendome un tesoro de amor.... ¡Oh!... sí... un
beso... sólo un beso tuyo podrá calmar el ardor que me consume.

--¡Capitán! exclamaron algunos de los oficiales al verle dirigirse
hacia la estatua como fuera de sí, extraviada la vista y con pasos
inseguros... ¿qué locura váis á hacer? ¡Basta de broma y dejad en paz
á los muertos!

El joven ni oyó siquiera las palabras de sus amigos, y tambaleando y
como pudo llegó á la tumba y aproximbe á la estatua; pero al tenderle
los brazos resonó un grito de horror en el templo. Arrojando sangre
por ojos, boca y nariz había caído desplomado y con la cara deshecha
al pie del sepulcro.

Los oficiales, mudos y espantados, ni se atrevían á dar un paso para
prestarle socorro.

En el momento en que su camarada intento acercar sus labios ardientes
á los de doña Elvira, habían visto al inmóvil guerrero levantar la
mano y derribarle con una espantosa bofetada de su guantelete de
piedra.




MAESE[1] PÉREZ EL ORGANISTA

  [Footnote 1: maese. Obsolete for _maestro_, 'master,' a title of
  respect.]


En Sevilla[1] en el mismo atrio de Santa Inés,[2] y mientras esperaba
que comenzase la Misa del Gallo,[3] oí esta tradición á una
demandadera del convento.

  [Footnote 1: Sevilla. Seville, the capital of the province of
  Seville, is a city of some 148,000 inhabitants situated in the
  southwestern part of Spain on the Guadalquivir River. In the
  sixteenth century, during the reign of Philip II (1556-1598), at
  which time the events of this story are supposed to take place,
  Seville reached the height of its prosperity.]

  [Footnote 2: Santa Inés. A convent church founded about 1374 by Doña
  Maria Coronel, its first abbess, and situated in the street named
  after her. The architecture is semi-Gothic.]

  [Footnote 3: la Misa del Gallo. The midnight mass preceding
  Christmas day. The introduction of the word _gallo_ has reference to
  the early cockcrowing. Compare the expression _al primer gallo_, at
  midnight.]

Como era natural, después de oirla, aguardé impaciente que comenzara
la ceremonia, ansioso de asistir á un prodigio.

Nada menos prodigioso, sin embargo, que el órgano de Santa Inés, ni
nada más vulgar que los insulsos motetes que nos regaló su organista
aquella noche.

Al salir de la Misa, no pude por menos de decirle á la demandadera con
aire de burla:

--¿En que consiste que el órgano de maese Pérez suena ahora tan mal?

--¡Toma! me contestó la vieja, en que ése no es el suyo.

--¿No es el suyo? ¿Pues que ha sido de él?

--Se cayó á pedazos de puro viejo, hace una porción de años.

--¿Y el alma del organista?

--No ha vuelto á aparecer desde que colocaron el que ahora le
sustituye. Si á alguno de mis lectores se le ocurriese hacerme la
misma pregunta, después de leer esta historia, ya sabe el por qué no
se ha continuado el milagroso portento hasta nuestros días.




I


--¿Véis ése de la capa roja y la pluma blanca en el fieltro, que
parece que trae sobre su justillo todo el oro de los galeones de
Indias;[1] aquél que baja en este momento de su litera para dar la
mano á esa otra señora, que después de dejar la suya, se adelanta
hacia aquí, precedida de cuatro pajes con hachas? Pues ése es el
marqués de Moscoso,[2] galán de la condesa viuda de Villapineda. Se
dice que antes de poner sus ojos sobre esta dama, había pedido en
matrimonio á la hija de un opulento señor; mas el padre de la
doncella, de quien se murmura que es un poco avaro ... pero, ¡calle!
en hablando del ruín de Roma, cátale aquí que asoma.[3] ¿Véis aquél
que viene por debajo del arco de San Felipe,[4] á pie, embozado en una
capa obscura, y precedido de un solo criado con una linterna? Ahora
llega frente al retablo.

  [Footnote 1: los galeones de Indias. The galleons from the West
  Indies brought much gold to Spain in the sixteenth century.]

  [Footnote 2: Moscoso ... Villapineda. Well-known Sevillian titles,
  but created much later than the epoch of our story, the former in
  1780, and the latter in 1738 (see Guía _oficial de España_, Madrid,
  1905). These anachronisms on the part of the author, however, in no
  way affect the artistic merit of the work. Nor are they the only
  ones to be found in this same legend. See note 4, below; also p. 98,
  note 2; p. 99, note 3.]

  [Footnote 3: en hablando del ruín de Roma, cátale aquí que asoma. A
  colloquial expression worded in various ways, as, for example, _en
  nombrando al ruín de Roma, luego asoma_. Compare the English
  expression "speak of the devil and he will appear," used under
  similar circumstances. By _Roma_ was probably meant originally the
  Catholic church or its officers.]

  [Footnote 4: arco de San Felipe. This is another anachronism on the
  part of Becquer, for the arch and church of San Felipe were not
  constructed until the eighteenth century. Neither exists at present.
  The arch traversed a narrow street between the church of the same
  name and the convent of Santa Inés. Below the arch was a picture in
  _azulejos_ representing Christ fallen with the cross and aided by
  Simon the Cyrenian.]

¿Reparasteis, al desembozarse para saludar á la imagen, la encomienda
que brilla en su pecho?

Á no ser por ese noble distintivo, cualquiera le creería un lonjista
de la calle de Culebras.[1] ... Pues ese es el padre en cuestión;
mirad como la gente del pueblo le abre paso y le saluda.

  [Footnote 1: calle de Culebras. One of the ancient commercial
  streets of Seville, known to-day as the Calle de Villegas. It
  connects the Plaza de San Salvador and the Calle de Francos.]

Toda Sevilla le conoce por su colosal fortuna. Él solo tiene más
ducados de oro en sus arcas que soldados mantiene nuestro señor el rey
Don Felipe;[1] y con sus galeones podría formar una escuadra
suficiente á resistir á la del Gran Turco....[2]

  [Footnote 1: Don Felipe. Evidently Philip II, born at Valladolid,
  Spain, May 21, 1527; king of Spain 1556-98; died at the Escorial,
  Spain, September 13, 1598. Son of the emperor Charles V and Isabella
  of Portugal. The recluse king made his first visit to Seville in
  1570 at the time of the preparations for the great war with the
  Turks.]

  [Footnote 2: el Gran Turco = 'the Grand Turk,' that is to say the
  Sultan of Turkey. Selim II was sultan at this time, and his navy was
  considered the most powerful of Europe. On October 7, 1571, however,
  it was defeated in the battle of Lepanto by the united fleets of
  Spain and several of the Italian states, commanded by Don Juan of
  Austria.]

Mirad, mirad ese grupo de señores graves: esos son los caballeros
veinticuatros.[1] ¡Hola, hola! También está aquí el flamencote,[2] á
quien se dice que no han echado ya el guante los señores de la cruz
verde,[3] merced á su influjo con los magnates [4] de Madrid.[5] ...
Éste no viene á la iglesia más que á oir música.... No, pues si maese
Perez no le arranca con su órgano lagrimas como puños, bien se puede
asegurar que no tiene su alma en su armario, sino friéndose en las
calderas de Pero Botero.[6] ... ¡Ay, vecina! Malo... malo... presumo
que vamos á tener jarana; yo me refugio en la iglesia, pues por lo que
veo, aquí van á andar más de sobra los cintarazos que los _Pater
Noster_.[7] Mirad, mirad; las gentes del duque de Alcalá[8] doblan la
esquina de la plaza de San Pedro,[9] y por el callejón de las
Dueñas[10] se me figura que he columbrado á las del de
Medinasidonia.[11] ... ¿No os lo dije?

  [Footnote 1: veinticuatros. Magistrates of certain cities of
  Andalusia, whose duties, according to the ancient municipal régime,
  were much the same as those of the modern _regidores_ or aldermen.
  As the name indicates, there were twenty-four of these city
  councilors.]

  [Footnote 2: el flamencote = 'the big (_or_ great) Fleming.' During
  the reign of Philip II, owing to his religious persecutions in the
  Netherlands, several eminent Flemish noblemen were sent to Spain to
  treat with him on this question. Among the most famous were Egmont
  (Lamoral, count of Egmont), who was in Spain from January to April,
  1565, and Montigny (Floris de Montmorency), who made two trips to
  Spain, one in 1562, and the other in 1566, on which occasion he
  remained until 1570, when he was murdered at the king's bidding.
  Philip received both of these envoys with a show of great cordiality
  and affection. The Spanish nobles, on the contrary, were cold in
  their reception, and would gladly have given them over to the
  Inquisition had there been no fear of Philip's anger. Either of
  these envoys, if they were ever in Seville, may be referred to here,
  or some other influential Fleming who may have been there under
  similar conditions, or this may be mere fiction.]

  [Footnote 3: los señores de la cruz verde. The officers of the
  Inquisition. The arms of this body were a green cross surmounted by
  a crown, with a drawn sword to the right and an olive branch to the
  left, upon a field of sable. See Emmanuel Delorme, _les Emblèmes de
  L'Inquisition d'Espagne_, Toulouse, 1905.]

  [Footnote 4: los magnates. Doubtless Philip II and his court are
  meant.]

  [Footnote 5: Madrid. See p. 80, note 2.]

  [Footnote 6: Pero Botero. See vocabulary.]

  [Footnote 7: Pater Noster. See p. 33, note 1.]

  [Footnote 8: El duque de Alcalá. In 1558 Philip II bestowed this
  title upon D. Pedro Afán o Enríquez de Ribera y Portocarrero, second
  Marquis of Tarifa, sixth Count of los Molares, and bearer of other
  titles as well. He was made viceroy of Naples in 1559, at about the
  age of fifty, and died some dozen years later. His wife was Doña
  Leonor Ponce de Leon, by whom he had no children. This is probably
  the duke referred to here, if we presume that the author had some
  definite duke in mind. The beautiful family mansion, known as _la
  Casa de Pílatos_, is still standing, a mixture of Gothic, Moorish,
  and Renaissance designs.]

  [Footnote 9: San Pedro. The church of San Pedro, a Gothic structure
  of the fourteenth century, built on the site of a mosque, is
  situated near the modern market and not far from the University. The
  little square in front of the church bears the same name.]

  [Footnote 10: callejón de las Dueñas. A short street called to-day
  _Calle de Gerona_. It connects the Plaza del Espiritu Santo and that
  of Sta. Catalina. This street received its name from the Cistercian
  nuns whose convent, destroyed in the revolution of 1868, was
  situated here.]

  [Footnote 11: las del de Medinasidonia= 'those of the (Duke) of
  Medinasidonia.' In the fifteenth century Seville was the scene of
  many bloody frays between the hostile houses of Medinasidonia and
  Ponce de Leon, but through the intervention of Ferdinand and
  Isabella this enmity was happily terminated before the close of that
  century, long before the creation of the title of Duke of Alcalá.
  The dukedom of Medinasidonia was created in 1445 by Juan II, and the
  best-known duke of this name during the reign of Philip II was
  commander of the celebrated Armada (1588).]

Ya se han visto, ya se detienen unos y otros, sin pasar de
sus puestos... los grupos se disuelven... los ministriles, á
quienes en estas ocasiones apalean amigos y enemigos, se retiran ... hasta
el señor asistente,[1] con su vara y todo, se refugia
en el atrio... y luego dicen que hay justicia.

  [Footnote 1: asistente. A magistrate in Seville, and certain other
  cities, whose duties and prerogatives corresponded with those of the
  _corregidor_ elsewhere. This office came into existence in Seville
  about the middle of the fifteenth century, and was filled during the
  reign of Philip II by some fifteen asistentes in succession, most of
  them counts.]

Para los pobres....

Vamos, vamos, ya brillan los broqueles en la obscuridad.... ¡Nuestro
Señor del Gran Poder[1] nos asista! Ya comienzan los golpes ¡vecina!
¡vecina! aqui... antes que cierren las puertas. Pero ¡calle! ¿Qué es
eso? Aún no ban comenzado, cuando lo dejan. ¿Que resplandor es aquel?
¡Hachas encendidas! ¡Literas! Es el señor obispo.[2]

  [Footnote 1: Nuestro Señor del Gran Poder. An epithet applied to
  Christ.]

  [Footnote 2: obispo. Of course the archbishop is meant here. The
  Seville Archbishops during the reign of Philip II were D. Fernando
  Valdes, Inquisitor General (d. 1568), D. Gaspar de Zúñiga y
  Avellaneda (d. 1571), D. Cristohal de Roxas y Sandoval (d. 1580),
  and D. Rodrigo de Castro (d. 1600). See Fermín Arana de Varflora,
  _Compendio descriptivo de ... Sevilla_, 1789, za parte, p. 13.]

La Virgen Santísima del Amparo,[1] á quien invocaba ahora mismo con el
pensamiento, lo trae en mi ayuda.... ¡Ay! ¡Si nadie sabe lo que yo
debo á esta Señora![2] ... ¡Con cuánta usura me paga las candelillas
que le enciendo los sabados!... Vedlo, qué hermosote está con sus
hábitos morados y su birrete rojo.... Dios le conserve en su silla
tantos siglos como yo deseo de vida para mí. Si no fuera por él, media
Sevilla hubiera ya ardido con estas disensiones de los duques. Vedlos,
vedlos, los hipocritones, como se acercan ambos á la litera del
Prelado para besarle el anillo.... Cómo le siguen y le acompañan,
confundiéndose con sus familiares. Quién diria que esos dos que
parecen tan amigos, si dentro de media hora se encuentran en una calle
obscura ... es decir, ¡ellos ... ellos! ... Líbreme Dios de creerlos
cobardes; buena muestra han dado de sí, peleando en algunas ocasiones
contra los enemigos de Nuestro Señor.... Pero es la verdad, que si se
buscaran ... y si se buscaran con ganas de encontrarse, se
encontrarían, poniendo fin de una vez á estas continuas reyertas, en
las cuales los que verdaderamente baten el cobre de firme son sus
deudos, sus allegados y su servidumbre.

  [Footnote 1: La Virgen Santisima del Amparo. An appellation that
  recalls the frequent rôle of the Virgin as protector in the
  mediaeval legends.]

  [Footnote 2: esta Señora--this Lady,' referring to the Virgin.]

Pero vamos, vecina, vamos á la iglesia, antes que se ponga de bote en
bote ... que algunas noches como ésta suele llenarse de modo que no
cabe ni un grano de trigo.... ¡Buena ganga tienen las monjas con su
organista!... ¿Cuándo se ha visto el convento tan favorecido como
ahora?...[1] De las otras comunidades, puedo decir que le han hecho á
maese Pérez proposiciones magnificas, verdad que nada tiene de
extraño, pues hasta el señor arzobispo le ha ofrecido montes de oro
por llevarle á la catedral... pero él, nada.... Primero dejaría la
vida que abandonar su órgano favorito.... ¿No conocéis á maese Pérez?
Verdad es que sois nueva en el barrio.... Pues es un santo varón;
pobre sí, pero limosnero cual no otro.... Sin más parientes que su
hija ni mas amigo que su órgano, pasa su vida entera en velar por la
inocencia de la una y componer los registros del otro.... ¡Cuidado que
el ergano es viejo!... Pues nada, él se da tal mana en arreglarlo y
cuidarlo, que sueña, que es una maravilla.... Como que le conoce de
tal modo, que a tientas... porque no sé si os lo he dicho, pero el
pobre señor es ciego de nacimiento.... Y ¡con que paciencia lleva su
desgracia!... Cuando le preguntan que[2] cuánto daría por ver,
responde: mucho, pero no tanto como creéls, porque tengo
esperanzas.--¿Esperanzas de ver?--Si, y muy pronto, añade sonriéndose
como un angel; ya cuento setenta y seis años; por muy larga que sea mi
vida, pronto veré á Dios....

  [Footnote 1: In women's convents the organ is played by the nuns
  themselves, and in Sta. Inés it is in the choir and not in a gallery
  apart, as Becyuer puts it.]

  [Footnote 2: que. A redundant use of the conjunction quite
  frequently found in Spanish.]

¡Pobrecito! Y si lo verá ... porque es humilde como las piedras de la
calle, que se dejan pisar de todo el mundo.... Siempre dice que no es
más que un pobre organista de convento, y puede dar lecciones de solfa
al mismo maestro de capilla de la Primada;[1] como que echó los
dientes en el oficio. Su padre tenía la misma profesión que él; yo no
le conocí, pero mi senora madre, que santa gloria haya,[2] dice que le
llevaba siempre al órgano consigo para darle á los fuelles. Luego, el
muchacho mostró tales disposiciones que, como era natural, á la muerte
de su padre heredó el cargo. ¡Y qué manos tiene! Dios se las bendiga.
Merecía que se las llevaran á la calle de Chicarreros[3] y se las
engarzasen en oro.... Siempre toca bien, siempre; pero en semejante
noche como ésta, es un prodigio.... Él tiene una gran devoción por
esta ceremonia de la Misa del Gallo, y cuando levantan la Sagrada
Forma[4] al punto y hora de las doce, que es cuando vino al mundo
Nuestro Señor Jesucristo ... las voces de su órgano son voces de
ángeles....

  [Footnote 1: la Primada =:'the primatical church.' Here the
  cathedral of Seville.]

  [Footnote 2: que santa gloria haya. In speaking of one who has died,
  it is customary in Spain to express some similar hope for the
  welfare of his soul. Notice the use of _haya_ instead of tenga,
  although possession is indicated.]

  [Footnote 3: la calle de Chicarreros. A street in Seville connecting
  the Plaza de San Francisco and the Calle de Francos. It was famous
  at this time for its jewelry-shops.]

  [Footnote 4: la Sagrada Forma = 'the consecrated host.' It is at the
  moment of the elevation of the host that the miracle of
  transubstantiation is believed by the Roman Catholic Church to take
  place. See p. 106, 1. 4.]

En fin, ¿para qué tengo de ponderarle lo que esta noche oirá? baste el
ver como todo lo más florido de Sevilla, hasta el mismo señor
arzobispo, vienen á un humilde convento para escucharle; y no se crea
que solo la gente sabida y á la que se le alcanza esto de la solfa
conocen su mérito, sino que hasta el populacho. Todas esas bandadas
que véis llegar con teas encendidas entonando villancicos con gritos
desaforados al compás de los panderos, las sonajas y las zambombas,
contra su costumbre, que es la de alborotar las iglesias, callan como
muertos cuando pone maese Pérez las manos en el órgano... y cuando
alzan ... no se siente una mosca ... de todos los ojos caen lagrimones
tamaños, y al concluir se oye como un suspiro inmenso, que no es otra
cosa que la respiración de los circunstantes contenida mientras dura
la música.... Pero vamos, vamos, ya han dejado de tocar las campanas,
y va á comenzar la Misa; vamos adentro....

Para todo el mundo es esta noche Noche-Buena,[1] pero para nadie mejor
que para nosotros.

  [Footnote 1: Noche-Buena = 'Christmas eve.' It is impossible to
  render in English the play upon the words _Buena_ and _mejor_.]

Esto diciendo, la buena mujer que había servido de cicerone á su
vecina, atravesó el atrio del convento de Santa Inés,[1] y codazo en
éste, empujón en aquel, se internó en el templo, perdiéndose entre la
muchedumbre que se agolpaba en la puerta.

  [Footnote 1: Santa Inés. See p. 94, note 3.]




II


La iglesia estaba iluminada con una profusión asombrosa. El torrente
de luz que se desprendía de los altares para llenar sus ámbitos,
chispeaba en los ricos joyeles de las damas que, arrodillándose sobre
los cojines de terciopelo que tendían los pajes y tomando el libro de
oraciones de manos de las dueñas,[1] vinieron á formar un brillante
círculo alrededor de la verja del presbiterio. Junto á aquella verja,
de pie, envueltos en sus capas de color galoneadas de oro, dejando
entrever con estudiado descuido las encomiendas rojas y verdes, en la
una mano el fieltro, cuyas plumas besaban los tapices, la otra sobre
los bruñidos gavilanes del estoque ó acariciando el pomo del cincelado
puñal, los caballaros veinticuatros,[2] con gran parte de lo mejor de
la nobleza sevillana, parecían formar un muro, destinado á defender á
sus hijas y sus esposas del contacto de la plebe. Ésta, que se agitaba
en el fondo de las naves, con un rumor parecido al del mar cuando se
alborota, prorrumpie en una aclamación de jubilo, acompañada del
discordante sonido de las sonajas y los panderos, al mirar aparecer al
arzobispo, el cual, después de sentarse junto al altar mayor bajo un
solio de grana que rodearon sus familiares, echó por tres veces la
bendición al pueblo.

  [Footnote 1: dueñas. See p.67, note 1.]

  [Footnote 2: veinticuatros. See p. 96, note 4.]

Era lá hora de que comenzase la Misa.

Trascurrieron, sin embargo, algunos minutos sin que el celebrante
apareciese. La multitud comenzaba á rebullirse, demostrando su
impaciencia; los caballeros cambiaban entre sí algunas palabras á
media voz, y el arzobispo mando á la sacristía uno de sus familiares á
inquirir el por qué no comenzaba la ceremonia.

--Maese Pérez se ha puesto malo, muy malo, y será imposible que asista
esta noche á la Misa de media noche. Esta fué la respuesta del
familiar.

La noticia cundió instantáneamente entre la muchedumbre. Pintar el
efecto desagradable que causó en to do el mundo, sería cosa imposible;
baste decir que comenzó á notarse tal bullicio en el templo, que el
asistente se puso de pie y los alguaciles entraron á imponer silencio,
confundiéndose entre las apiñadas olas de la multitud.

En aquelmomento, un hombre mal trazado, seco, huesudo y bisojo por
anadidura, se adelantó hasta el sitio que ocupaba el prelado.

--Maese Pérez esta enfermo, dijo: la ceremonia no puede empezar. Si
queréis, yo tocaré el órgano en su ausencia; que ni maese Pérez es el
primer organista del mundo, ni á su muerte dejará de usarse este
instrumento por falta de inteligente.... El arzobispo hizo una señal
de asentimiento con la cabeza, y ya algunos de los fieles que conocían
á aquel personaje extraño por un organista envidioso, enemigo del de
Santa Inés, comenzaban á prorrumpir en exclamaciones de disgusto,
cuando de improviso se oyó en el atrîo un ruido espantoso.

--¡Maese Phez está aquí!... ¡Maese Pérez está aquí!... Á estas voces
de los que estaban apiñados en la puerta, todo el mundo volvió la
cara.

Maese Pérez, pálido y desencajado, entraba en efecto en la iglesia,
conducido en un silón, que todos se disputaban el honor de llevar en
sus hombros.

Los preceptos de los doctores, las lágrimas de su hija, nada había
sido bastante á detenerle en el lecho.

--No, había dicho; esta es la última, lo conozco, lo conozco, y no
quiero morir sin visitar mi órgano, y esta noche sobre todo, la
Noche-Buena. Vamos, lo quiero, lo mando; vamos a la iglesia.

Sus deseos se habían cumplido; los concurrentes le subieron en brazos
á la tribuna, y comenzó la Misa.

En aquel punto sonaban las doce en el reloj de la catedral.

Pasó el introito[1] y el Evangelió[2] y el ofertorio,[3] y llegó el
instante solemne en que el sacerdote, después de haberla consagrado,
toma con la extremidad de sus dedos la Sagrada Forma y comienza á
elevarla.

  [Footnote 1: introito. "In the ancient Church a psalm was sung or
  chanted immediately before the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel. As this
  took place while the priest was entering within the septum or rails
  of the altar, it acquired the name of Introitus or Introit." Walter
  F. Hook, _Church Dict._, London, Murray, 1887, p. 407.]

  [Footnote 2: Evangelio = Gospel.' "The First Council of Orange in
  441, and that of Valentia in Spain, ordered the Gospel to be read
  after the Epistle and before the offertory." Addis and Arnold,
  '_Catholic Dict._, London, 1884, p. 380.]

  [Footnote 3: ofertorio. The offertory or "service of song while the
  oblations were collected and received is of ancient date. St.
  Augustine speaks of the singing of hymns at the oblation." Walter F.
  Hook, _Church Dict._, p. 540. The offertory is said immediately
  after the _Creed_, and before the Preface and Sanctus.]

Una nube de incienso que se desenvolvía en ondas azuladas llenó el
ámbito de la iglesia; las campanillas repicaron con un sonido
vibrante, y maese Pérez puso sus crispadas manos sobre las teclas del
órgano.

Las cien voces de sus tubos de metal resonaron en un acorde majestuoso
y prolongado, que se perdío poco á poco, como si una ráfaga de aire
hubiese arrebatado sus últimos ecos.

Á este primer acorde, que parecía una voz que se elevaba desde la
tierra al cielo, respondió otro lejano y suave que fué creciendo,
creciendo hasta convertirse en un torrente de atronadora armonía.

Era la voz de los ángeles, que atravesando los espacios, llegaba al
mundo.

Después comenzaron á oirse como unos himnos distantes que entonaban
las jerarquías de serafines; mil himnos á la vez, que al confundirse
formaban uno solo, que, no obstante, era no más el acompañamiento de
una extraña melodía, que parecía flotar sobre aquel océano de
misteriosos ecos, como un jirón de niebla sobre las olas del mar.

Luego fueron perdiéndose unos cantos, después otros; la combinación se
simplificaba. Ya no eran más que dos voces, cuyos ecos se confundían
entre sí; luego quedó una aislada, sosteniendo una nota brillante como
un hilo de luz.... El sacerdote inclinó la frente, y por encima de su
cabeza cana y como á tráves de una gasa azul que fingía el humo del
incienso, apareció la Hostia á los ojos de los fieles. En aquel
instante la nota que maese Pérez sostenía trinando, se abrió, se
abrió, y una explosión de armonía gigante estremeció la iglesia, en
cuyos ángulos zumbaba el aire comprimido, y cuyos vidrios de colores
se estremecían en sus angostos ajimeces.

De cada una de las notas que formaban aquel magnífico acorde, se
desarrolló un tema; y unos cerca, otros lejos, éstos brillantes,
aquellos sordos, diríase que las aguas y los pájaros, las brisas y las
frondas, los hombres y los ángeles, la tierra y los cielos, cantaban
cada cual en su idioma un himno al nacimiento del Salvador.

La multitud escuchaba atónita y suspendida. En todos los ojos había
una lágrima, en todos los espíritus un profundo recogimiento.

El sacerdote que oficiaba sentía temblar sus manos, porque Aquél que
levantaba en ellas, Aquél á quien saludaban hombres y arcángeles era
su Dios; era su Dios, y le parecía haber visto abrirse los cielos y
trasfigurarse la Hostia.[1]

  [Footnote 1: trasfigurarse la Hostia. See p. 101, note 2.]

El órgano proseguía sonando; pero sus voces se apagaban gradualmente,
como una voz que se pierde de eco en eco, y se aleja, y se debilita al
alejarse, cuando de pronto sonó un grito en la tribuna, un grito
desgarrador, agudo, un grito de mujer.

El órgano exhalo un sonido discorde y extraño, semejante á un sollozo,
y quedó mudo.

La multitud se agolpo á la escalera de la tribuna, hacia la que,
arrancados de su extasis religiose, volvieron la mirada con ansiedad
todos los fieles.

--¿Qué ha sucedido? ¿qué pasa? se decían unos á otros, y nadie sabía
responder, y todos se empeñaban en adivinarlo, y crecía la confusión,
y el alboroto comenzaba á subir de punto, amenazando turbar el orden y
el recogimiento propios de la iglesia.

--¿Qué ha sido eso? preguntaban las damas al asistente, que, precedido
de los ministriles, fué uno de los primeros á subir á la tribuna, y
que, pálido y con muestras de profundo pesar, se dirigía al puesto en
donde le esperaba el arzobispo, ansioso, como todos, por saber la
causa de aquel desorden.

--¿Qué hay?

--Que maese Pérez acaba de morir.

En efecto, cuando los primeros fieles, después de atropellarse por la
escalera, llegaron á la tribuna, vieron--al pobre organista caído de
boca sobre las teclas de su viejo instrumento, que aún vibraba
sordamente, mientras su hija, arrodillada á sus pies, le llamaba en
vano entre suspiros y sollozos.




III


--Buenas noches, mi señora doña Baltasara; ¿también usarced[1] viene
esta noche á la Misa del Gallo? Por mi parte tenía hecha intención de
irla á oir á la parroquia; pero lo que sucede... ¿Dónde va Vicente?
Donde va la gente.[2] Y eso que, si he de decir la verdad, desde que
murió maese Pérez, parece que me echan una losa sobre el corazón
cuando entro en Santa Inés... ¡Pobrecito! ¡Era un santo!... Yo de mí
se decir, que conservo un pedazo de su jubón como una reliquia, y lo
merece... pues en Dios y en mi ánima, que si el señor arzobispo tomara
mano en ello, es seguro que nuestros nietos le verían en los
altares.[3] ... Mas ¡cómo ha de ser!... Á muertos y á idos, no hay
amigos.[4] ... Ahora lo que priva es la novedad... ya me entiende
usarced. ¡Qué! ¿No sabe nada de lo que pasa? Verdad que nosotras nos
parecemos en eso; de nuestra casita á la iglesia, y de la iglesia á
nuestra casita, sin cuidarnos de lo que se dice ó déjase de decir...
sólo que yo, así... al vuelo... una palabra de acá, otra de acullá...
sin ganas de enterarme siquiera, suelo estar al corriente de algunas
novedades.... Pues, sí señor; parece cosa hecha que el organista de
San Román,[5] aquel bisojo, que siempre está echando pestes de los
otros organistas; aquel perdulariote, que más parece jifero de la
puerta de la Carne[6] que maestro de solfa, va á tocar esta
Noche-Buena en lugar de maese Pérez. Ya sabrá usarced, porque esto lo
ha sabido todo el mundo y es cosa pública en Sevilla, que nadie quería
comprometerse á hacerlo. Ni aun su hija que es profesora, y después de
la muerte de su padre entró en el convento de novicia. Y era natural:
acostumbrados á oir aquellas maravillas, cualquiera otra cosa había de
parecernos mala, por más que quisieran evitarse las comparaciones.
Pues cuando ya la comunidad habrá decidido que, en honor del difunto y
como muestra de respeto á su memoria, permanecería callado el organo
en esta noche, háte aqui que se presenta nuestro hombre, diciendo que
él se atreve á tocarlo.... No hay nada más atrevido que la
ignorancia.... Cierto que la culpa no es suya, sino de los que le
consienten esta profanación... pero, así va el mundo... y digo, no es
cosa la gente que acude...[7] cualquiera diría que nada ha cambiado
desde un año á otro. Los mismos personajes, el mismo lujo, los mismos
empellones en la puerta, la misma animación en el atrio, la misma
multitud en el templo... ¡Ay, si levantara la cabeza el muerto! se
volvía[8] á morir por no oir su órgano tocado por manos semejantes. Lo
que tiene que,[9] si es verdad lo que me han dicho las gentes del
barrio, le preparan una buena al intruso. Cuando llegue el momento de
poner la mano sobre las teclas, va á comenzar una algarabía de
sonajas, panderos, y zambombas, que no haya más que oir... pero
¡calle! ya entra en la iglesia el heroe de la función. ¡Jesús, qué
ropilla de colorines, qué gorguera de cañutos, qué aires de personaje!
Vamos, vamos, qué ya hace rato que llego el arzobispo, y va á comenzar
la misa... vamos, que me parece que esta noche va á darnos que contar
para muchos días.

  [Footnote 1: usarced. Contraction of _vues(tr)a merced_, 'your
  grace.']

  [Footnote 2: ¿Dónde va Vicente? Donde va la gente. See vocabulary.
  Note the two senses in which the adverb of place, _donde_, is used.]

  [Footnote 3: en los altares. That is to say canonized.]

  [Footnote 4: Á muertos y á idos, no hay amigos = 'The dead and
  departed have no friends (_or_ are soon forgotten)'.]

  [Footnote 5: San Román. A church, originally a mosque, situated in
  the northern part of Seville, on the Plaza de San Román. It was
  reconstructed by D. Pedro I. Its façade is very plain, the chief
  decorative features being an ogival doorway in the center and a
  window of similar form to the right. It contains some fine statuary
  by Montañés. The fifteenth-century painter Juan Sánchez de Castro is
  buried here.]

  [Footnote 6: la puerta de la Carne. One of the ancient gates of
  Seville, situated in the north wall near the _Matadero_
  ('slaughter-house'). Hence its name. It was once called the _Puerta
  Judía_. But little remains now of the old walls of Seville, which
  had a circumference of upwards of ten miles, and were pierced by
  fifteen gates and strengthened by one hundred and sixty-six towers.]

  [Footnote 7: no es cosa la gente que acude = 'the crowd in
  attendance is not small' or 'what a lot of persons have come!' The
  expression _no es cosa_ is used familiarly in the sense of _es
  mucha_.]

  [Footnote 8: volvía. A Common use of the imperfect indicative
  instead of the conditional.]

  [Footnote 9: Lo que tiene que = 'the fact is.']

Esto diciendo la buena mujer, que ya conocen nuestros lectores por sus
exabruptos de locuacidad, penetró en Santa Inés, abriéndose según
costumbre, un camino entre la multitud á fuerza de empellones y
codazos.

Ya se habiá dado principio á la ceremonia.

El templo estaba tan brillante como el año anterior.

El nuevo organista, después de atravesar por en medio de los fieles
que ocupaban las naves para ir á besar el anillo del prelado, había
subido á la tribuna, donde tocaba unos tras otros los registros del
órgano; con una gravedad tan afectada como ridícula.

Entre la gente menuda que se apiñaba á los pies de la iglesia, se oía
un rumor sordo y confuso, cierto presagio de que la tempestad
comenzaba á fraguarse y no tardaría mucho en dejarse sentir.

--Es un truhán, que por no hacer nada bien, ni aún mira á derechas,
decían los unos.

--Es un ignorantón, que después de haber puesto el órgano de su
parroquia peor que una carraca, viene á profanar el de maese Pérez,
decían los otros.

Y mientras éste se desembarazaba del capote para prepararse á darle de
firme á su pandero, y aquél apercibía sus sonajas, y todos se
disponían á hacer bulla á más y mejor, solo alguno que otro se
aventuraba á defender tibiamente al extraño personaje, cuyo porte
orgulloso y pedantesco hacía tan notable contraposición con la modesta
apariencia y la afable bondad del difunto maese Pérez.

Al fin llego el esperado momento, el momento solemne en que el
sacerdote, despues de inclinarse y murmurar algunas palabras santas,
tomó la Hostia en sus manos.... Las campanillas repicaron, semejando
su repique una lluvia de notas de cristal; se elevaron las diáfanas
ondas del incienso, y sonó el organo.

Una estruendosa algarabía llenó los ámbitos de la iglesia en aquel
instante y ahogó su primer acorde.

Zampoñas, gaitas, sonajas, panderos, todos los instrumentos del
populacho, alzaron sus discordantes voces á la vez; pero la confusión
y el estrépito sólo duró algunos segundos. Todos a la vez como habían
comenzado, enmudecieron de pronto.

El segundo acorde, amplio, valiente, magnifico, se sostenía aún
brotando de los tubos de metal del organo, como una cascada de armonía
inagotable y sonora.

Cantos celestes como los que acarician 'los oídos en los momentos de
éxtasis; cantos que percibe el espíritu y no los puede repetir el
labio; notas sueltas de una melodía lejana, que suenan á intervalos,
traídas en las ráfagas del viento, rumor de hojas que se besan en los
arboles con un murmullo semejante al de la lluvia, trinos de alondras
que se levantan gorjeando de entre las flores como una saeta despedida
á las nubes; estruendo sin nombre, imponente como los rugidos de una
tempestad; coro de serafines sin ritmos ni cadencia, ignota música del
cielo que sólo la imaginación comprende; hímnos alados, que parecían
remontarse al trono del Señor como una tromba de luz y de sonidos...
todo lo expresaban las cien voces del órgano, con más pujanza, con más
misteriosa poesía, con más fantastico color que los habían expresado
nunca .....

Cuando el organista bajó de la tribuna, la muchedumbre que se agolpo á
la escalera fué tanta, y tanto su afán por verle y admirarle, que el
asistente temiendo, no sin razón, que le ahogaran entre todos, mando á
algunos de sus ministriles para que, vara en mano, le fueran abriendo
camino hasta llegar al altar mayor, donde el prelado le esperaba.

--Ya véis, le dijo este último cuando le trajeron á su presencia;
vengo desde mi palacio aquí sólo por escucharos. ¿Seréis tan cruel
como maese Pérez, que nunca quiso excusarme el viaje, tocando la
Noche-Buena en la Misa de la catedral?

--El año que viene, respondió el organista, prometo daros gusto, pues
por todo el oro de la tierra no volvería á tocar este órgano.

--¿Y por qué? interrumpió el prelado.

--Porque... añadió el organista, procurando dominar la emoción que se
revelaba en la palidez de su rostro; porque es viejo y malo, y no
puede expresar todo lo que se quiere. El arzobispo se retiró, seguido
de sus familiares. Unas tras otras, las literas de los señores fueron
desfilando y perdiéndose en las revueltas[1] de las calles vecinas;
los grupos del atrio se disolvieron, dispersándose los fieles en
distintas direcciones; y ya la demandadera se disponía á cerrar las
puertas de la entrada del atrio, cuando se divisaban aún dos mujeres
que, después de persignarse y murmurar una oración ante el retablo del
arco de San Felipe,[2] prosiguieron su camino, internándose en el
callejón de las Duenas.[3]

  [Footnote 1: revueltas= 'turns.' The streets of Seville are many of
  them crooked like those of Toledo and other Moorish cities in
  Spain.]

  [Footnote 2: San Felipe. See p.95, note 4.]

  [Footnote 3: el callejon de las Duenas. See p.98, note 1.]

--¿Qué quiere usarced? mi señora doña Baltasara, decía la una, yo soy
de este genial. Cada loco con su tema.... Me lo habían de asegurar
capuchinos[1] descalzos y no lo creería del todo.... Ese hombre no
puede haber tocado lo que acabamos de escuchar.... Si yo lo he oído
mil veces en San Bartolomé,[2] que era su parroquia, y de donde tuvo
que echarle el senor cura por malo, y era cosa de taparse los oídos
con algodones.... Y luego, si no hay más que mirarle al rostro, que
según dicen, es el espejo del alma.... Yo me acuerdo, pobrecito, como
si lo estuviera viendo, me acuerdo de la cara de maese Pérez, cuando
en semejante noche como ésta bajaba de la tribuna, después de haber
suspendido al auditorio con sus primores.... ¡Qué sonrisa tan
bondadosa, qué color tan animado!... Era viejo y parecía un ángel...
no que éste ha bajado las escaleras á trompicones, como si le ladrase
un perro en la meseta, y con un color de difunto y unas... Vamos, mi
señora doña Baltasara, créame usarced, y créame con todas veras... yo
sospecho que aquí hay busilis....

  [Footnote 1: capuchinos= 'Capuchins.' An order of mendicant friars
  founded in 1528 by Matteo di Bassi, and named from the pointed
  capouch or cowl that distinguishes their dress. Honesty, as well as
  poverty and humility, is supposed to be one of their crowning
  virtues.]

  [Footnote 2: San Bartolomé. The church of St. Bartholomew is
  situated on the Plaza de San Bartolomé in the northeastern part of
  the city. It was built on the site of a Jewish synagogue, after the
  expulsion of the Jews by the Christian kings of Spain. Its present
  architecture is Doric and dates only from the eighteenth century.]

Comentando las últimas palabras, las dos mujeres doblaban la esquina
del callejón y desaparecían.

Creemos inútil decir á nuestros lectores quién era una de ellas.




IV


Había transcurrido un año más. La abadesa del convento de Santa Inés y
la hija de maese Pérez hablaban en voz baja, medio ocultas entre las
sombras del coro de la iglesia. El esquilón llamaba á voz herida á los
fieles desde la torre, y alguna que otra rara persona atravesaba el
atrio silencioso y desierto esta vez, y después de tomar el agua
bendita en la puerta, escogiá un puesto en un rincón de las naves,
donde unos cuantos vecinos del barrio esperaban tranquilamente que
comenzara la Misa del Gallo.

--Ya lo véis, decía la superiora, vuestro temor es sobremanera pueril;
nadie hay en el templo; toda Sevilla acude en tropel á la catedral
esta noche, Tocad vos el órgano y tocadle sin desconfianza de ninguna
clase; estaremos en comunidad... pero... proseguís callando sin que
cesen vuestros suspiros. ¿Qué os pasa? ¿Qué tenéis?

--Tengo... miedo, exclamó la joven con un acento profundamente
conmovido.

--¡Miedo! ¿de qué?

--No sé... de una cosa sobrenatural.... Anoche, mirad, yo os había
oído decir que teníais empeño en que tocase el órgano en la Misa, y
ufana con esta distinción pensé arreglar sus registros y templarle,[1]
á fin de que hoy os sorprendiese... Vine al coro... sola... abrí la
puerta que conduce á la tribuna.... En el reloj de la catedral sonaba
en aquel momento una hora... no sé cuál.... Pero las campanadas eran
tristísimas y muchas... muchas... estuvieron sonando todo el tiempo
que yo permanecí como clavada en el dintel y aquel tiempo me pareció
un siglo.

  [Footnote 1: templarle. See p. 66, note 1.]

La iglesia estaba desierta y obscura.... Allá lejos, en el fondo,
brillaba como una estrella perdida en el cielo de la noche, una luz
moribunda, la luz de la lámpara que arde en el altar mayor.... Á sus
reflejos debilísimos, que sólo contribuían á hacer más visible todo el
profundo horror de las sombras, ví... le ví, madre, no lo dudéis, ví
un hombre que en silencio y vuelto de espaldas hacia el sitio en que
yo estaba, recorría con una mano las teclas del órgano, mientras
tocaba con la otra á sus registros... y el órgano sonaba; pero sonaba
de una manera indescriptible. Cada una de sus notas parecía un sollozo
ahogado dentro del tubo de metal, que vibraba con el aire comprimido
en su hueco, y reproducía el tono sordo, casi imperceptible, pero
justo.

Y el reloj, de la catedral continuaba dando la hora, y el hombre aquel
proseguía recorriendo las teclas. Yo oía hasta su respiración.

El horror habia helado la sangre de mis venas; sentía en mi cuerpo
como un frío glacial, y en mis sienes fuego.... Entonces quise gritar,
pero no pude. El hombre aquel había vuelto la cara y me había
mirado... digo mal, no me había mirado, porque era ciego.... ¡Era mi
padre!

--¡Bah! hermana, desechad esas fantasías con que el enemigo malo[1]
procura turbar las imaginaciones débiles.... Rezad un _Pater
Noster_[2] y un _Ave Maria_[3] al arcángel San Miguel,[4] jefe de las
milicias celestiales, para que os asista contra los malos espíritus.
Llevad al cuello un escapulario tocado en la reliquia de San
Pacomio,[5] abogado contra las tentaciones, y marchad, marchad á
ocupar la tribuna del órgano; la Misa va á comenzar y ya esperan con
impaciencia los fieles.... Vuestro padre está en el cielo, y desde
allí, antes que á daros sustos, bajará á inspirar á su hija en esta
ceremonia solemne para el objeto de tan especial devoción.

  [Footnote 1: el enemigo malo. That is to say, the devil.]

  [Footnote 2: Pater Noster. See p. 33, note 1.]

  [Footnote 3: Ave Maria. "A form of devotion used in the Church of
  Rome, comprising the salutation addressed by the angel Gabriel to
  the Blessed Virgin Mary. (Luke i. 28.) The words Ave Maria are the
  first two, in Latin, of the form as it appears in the manuals of the
  Roman Church, thus: ' Hail Mary (Ave Maria), full of grace, the Lord
  is with thee, etc.' To which is appended the following petition:
  'Holy Mary, mother of God, pray for us sinners now, and in the hour
  of our death. Amen.'... It was not used before the Hours, until the
  sixteenth century, in Romish offices." Hook's _Church Dict._,
  London, 1887, p. 72. Some say earlier.]

  [Footnote 4: San Miguel = 'St. Michael.' "An archangel mentioned in
  the Bible. He is regarded as the leader of the whole host of
  angels... He is spoken of five times in the Bible, always [or to be
  more exact _usually_ as fighting] John mentions him as fighting at
  the head of the angels against the dragon and his host." _Century
  Dict._]

  [Footnote 5: San Pacomio = 'St. Pachomius.' "Born probably in Lower
  Egypt, about 292: died about 349. One of the founders of
  monasticism. He established a monastery on the island of Tabenna in
  the Nile, and was the first thus to collect the monks under one roof
  and establish strict rules of government for the community."
  _Century Diet_.]

La priora fué á ocupar su sillón en el coro en medio de la comunidad.
La hija de maese Pérez abrió con mano temblorosa la puerta de la
tribuna para sentarse en el banquillo del órgano, y comenzó la Misa.

Comenzó la Misa, y prosiguió sin que ocurriese nada de notable hasta
que llegó la consagración.[1] En aquel momento sonó el órgano, y al
mismo tiempo que el órgano un grito de la hija de maese Pérez....

  [Footnote 1: consagración = 'consecration.' "The form of words by
  which the bread and wine in the Mass are changed into Christ's body
  and blood." Addis and Arnold, _Catholic Diet_, London, 1884, p. 216.
  See also p. 101, note 2.]

La superiora, las monjas y algunos de los fieles corrieron á la
tribuna.

--¡Miradle, miradle! decía la joven fijando sus desencajados ojos en
el banquillo, de donde se había levantado asombrada para agarrarse con
sus manos convulsas al barandal de la tribuna.

Todo el mundo fijó sus miradas en aquel punto. El órgano estaba solo,
y no obstante, el órgano seguía sonando ... sonando como sólo los
arcángeles podrían imitarlo en sus raptos de místico
alborozo...............

--¡No os lo dije yo una y mil veces, mi señora doña Baltasara, no os
lo dije yo!... ¡Aquí hay busilis!... Oidlo; qué, ¿no estuvísteis
anoche en la Misa del Gallo? Pero, en fin ya sabréis lo que paso. En
toda Sevilla no se habla de otra cosa.... El señor arzobispo está
hecho, y con razón, una furia.... Haber dejado de asistir á Santa
Inés; no haber podido presenciar el portento... ¿y para qué? para oir
una cencerrada; porque personas que lo oyeron dicen que lo que hizo el
dichoso organista de San Bartolomé en la catedral no fué otra cosa....
Si lo decía yo. Eso no puede haberlo tocado el bisojo, mentira ...
aqui hay busilis, y el busilis era, en efecto, el alma de maese Pérez.




LA CRUZ DEL DIABLO


Que lo creas ó no, me importa bien poco. Mi abuelo se lo narró á mi
padre; mi padre me lo ha referido á mí, y yo te lo cuento ahora,
siquiera no sea mas que por pasar el rato.[1]
***

  [Footnote 1: por pasar el rato = 'to while away the time.']


I


El crepúsculo comenzaba á extender sus ligeras alas de vapor sobre las
pintorescas orillas del Segre,[1] cuando después de una fatigosa
jornada llegamos á Bellver,[2] término de nuestro viaje.

  [Footnote 1: Segre. A river of the province of Lérida in northern
  Spain. It rises in the Pyrenees, and joins the Ebro twenty-two miles
  southwest of Lérida. Its chief tributary is the Cinca. Length about
  250 miles. See _Century Diet_.]

  [Footnote 2: Bellver. A little town of some 650 inhabitants,
  situated in the valley of the Segre, in the diocese of Urgel,
  province of Lérida, Spain. Its situation is very picturesque. It
  contains an ancient castle.]

Bellver es una pequeña población situada á la falda de una colina, por
detrás de la cual se ven elevarse, como las gradas de un colosal
anfiteatro de granito, las empinadas y nebulosas crestas de los
Pirineos.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Pirineos = 'Pyrenees.' A mountain range which separates
  France from Spain, and extends from the Bay of Biscay to the
  Mediterranean. The highest points are about 11,000 feet. A visit to
  the Eastern Pyrenees from the Spanish side is much more difficult
  than from France, as both traveling and hotel accommodations are
  sadly lacking.]

Los blancos caseríos que la rodean, salpicados aquí y allá sobre una
ondulante sábana de verdura, parecen á lo lejos un bando de palomas
que han abatido su vuelo para apagar su sed en las aguas de la ribera.

Una pelada roca, á cuyos pies tuercen éstas su curso, y sobre cuya
cima se notan aún remotos vestigios de construcción, señala la antigua
línea divisoria entre el condado de Urgel[1] y el más importante de
sus feudos.

  [Footnote 1: el condado de Urgel = 'the earldom (_or_ county) of
  Urgel.' The town of this name (2800 inhabitants) is situated on the
  Segre, seventy-four miles northwest of Barcelona, in the province of
  Lérida, Spain. It has been the see of a bishop since 840, and
  possesses a Gothic cathedral. The earldom was of considerable
  importance in the fourteenth century, Count Jaime (James) de Urgel
  (d. 1433) being a most dangerous claimant of the crown of Aragon.]

Á la derecha del tortuoso sendero que conduce á este punto, remontando
la corriente del río, y siguiendo sus curvas y frondosas márgenes, se
encuentra una cruz.

El asta y los brazos son de hierro; la redonda base en que se apoya,
de mármol, y la escalinata que á ella conduce, de obscuros y mal
unidos fragmentos de sillería.

La destructora acción de los años, que ha cubierto de orín el metal,
ha roto y carcomido la piedra de este monumento, entre cuyas
hendiduras crecen algunas plantas trepadoras que suben enredándose
hasta coronarlo, mientras una vieja y corpulenta encina le sirve de
dosel.

Yo había adelantado algunos minutos á mis compañeros de viaje, y
deteniendo mi escuálida cabalgadura, contemplaba en silencio aquella
cruz, muda y sencilla expresión de las creencias y la piedad de otros
siglos.

Un mundo de ideas se agolpo á mi imaginación en aquel instante. Ideas
ligerísimas, sin forma determinada, que unían entre sí, como un
invisible hilo de luz, la profunda soledad de aquellos lugares, el
alto silencio de la naciente noche y la vaga melancolía de mi
espíritu.

Impulsado de un pensamiento religioso, espontáneo é indefinible, eché
maquinalmente pie á tierra, me descubrí, y comencé á buscar en el
fondo de mi memoria una de aquellas oraciones que me enseñaron cuando
niño; una de aquellas oraciones que, cuando más tarde se escapan
involuntarias de nuestros labios, parece que aligeran el pecho
oprimido, y semejantes á las lágrimas, alivian el dolor, que también
toma estas formas para evaporarse.

Ya había comenzado á murmurarla, cuando de improviso sentí que me
sacudían con violencia por los hombros.

Volví la cara: un hombre estaba al lado mío.

Era uno de nuestros guías, natural del país, el cual, con una
indescriptible expresión de terror pintada en el rostro, pugnaba por
arrastrarme consigo y cubrir mi cabeza con el fieltro que aún tenía en
mis manos.

Mi primera mirada, mitad de asombro, mitad de cólera, equivalía á una
interrogación enérgica, aunque muda.

El pobre hombre, sin cejar en su empeño de alejarme de aquel sitio,
contestó á ella con estas palabras, que entonces no pude comprender,
pero en las que había un acento de verdad que me sobrecogió:--¡Por la
memoria de su madre! ¡Por lo más sagrado que tenga en el mundo,
señorito, cúbrase usted la cabeza, y aléjese más que de prisa de esta
cruz! ¡Tan desesperado está usted, que no bastándole la ayuda de Dios,
recurre á la del demonio!

Yo permanecí un rato mirandole en silencio. Francamente, creí que
estaba loco, pero él prosiguió con igual vehemencia:

--Usted busca la frontera; pues bien, si delante de esa cruz le pide
usted al cielo que le preste ayuda, las cumbres de los monies vecinos
se levantarán en una sola noche hasta las estrellas invisibles, sólo
porque no encontremos la raya en toda nuestra vida.

Yo no pude menos de sonreir.

--¿Se burla usted?... ¿cree acaso que esa es una cruz santa como la
del porche de nuestra iglesia?...

--¿Quien lo duda?

--Pues se engaña usted de medio á medio, porque esa cruz, salvo lo que
tiene de Dios, está maldita... esa cruz pertenece á un espíritu
maligno, y por eso la llaman _La cruz del diablo_.

--¡La cruz del diablo! repetí cediendo á sus instancias, sin darme
cuenta á mí mismo del involuntario temor que comenzó á apoderarse de
mi espíritu, y que me rechazaba como una fuerza desconocida de aquel
lugar; ¡la cruz del diablo! ¡Nunca ha herido mi imaginación una
amalgama más disparatada de dos ideas tan absolutamente enemigas!...
¡Una cruz... y del diablo!!! ¡Vaya, vaya! Fuerza sera que en llegando
á la población me expliques este monstruoso absurdo.

Durante este corto diálogo, nuestros camaradas, que habían picado sus
cabalgaduras, se nos reunieron al pie de la cruz; yo les expliqué en
breves palabras lo que acababa de suceder; monté nuevamente en mi
rocín, y las campanas de la parroquia llamaban lentamente á la
oración, cuando nos apeamos en lo más escondido y lóbrego de los
paradores de Bellver.



II


Las llamas rojas y azules se enroscaban chisporroteando á lo largo del
grueso tronco de encina que ardía en el ancho hogar; nuestras sombras,
que se proyectaban temblando sobre los ennegrecidos muros, se
empequeñecían ó tomaban formas gigantescas, según la hoguera despedía
resplandores más ó menos brillantes; el vaso de saúco, ora vacío, ora
lleno y no de agua, como cangilón de noria, habia dado tres veces la
vuelta en derredor del círculo que formábamos junto al fuego, y todos
esperaban con impaciencia la historia de _La cruz del diablo_, que á
guisa de postres de la frugal cena que acabábamos de consumir, se nos
había prometido, cuando nuestro guía tosió por dos veces, se echó al
coleto un último trago de vino, limpióse con el revés de la mano la
boca, y comenzó de este modo:

--Hace mucho tiempo, mucho tiempo, yo no sé cuánto, pero los moros
ocupaban aún la mayor parte de España, se llamaban condes[1] nuestros
reyes, y las villas y aldeas pertenecían en feudo á ciertos señores,
que á su vez prestaban homenaje á otros más poderosos, cuando acaeció
lo que voy á referir á ustedes.[2]

  [Footnote 1: condes = 'counts,' 'earls.' The word conde comes from
  the Latin _comes, comitem_, 'companion,' and during the Roman empire
  in Spain was a title of honor granted to certain officers who had
  jurisdiction over war and peace. During the reign of the Goths it
  was likewise an official and not a nobiliary title. Later, with the
  growth of the feudal system, the counts became not merely royal
  officers, but hereditary rulers, with coronets and arms and an
  assumption of absolute authority in their counties. In some of these
  counties the title developed later into that of king.]

  [Footnote 2: The epoch referred to is doubtless in the eleventh
  century before the first crusade. See p. 122, note 1.]

Concluída esta breve introducción histórica, el héroe de la fiesta
guardó silencio durante algunos segundos como para coordinar sus
recuerdos, y prosiguió así:

--Pues es el caso, que en aquel tiempo remote, esta villa y algunas
otras formaban parte del patrimonio de un noble barón, cuyo castillo
señorial se levantó por muchos siglos sobre la cresta de un peñasco
que baña el Segre, del cual toma su nombre.

Aún testifican la verdad de mi relación algunas informes ruinas que,
cubiertas de jaramago y musgo, se alcanzan á ver sobre su cumbre desde
el camino que conduce á este pueblo.

No sé si por ventura ó desgracia quiso la suerte que este señor, á
quien por crueldad detestaban sus vasallos, y por sus malas cualidades
ni el rey admitía en la corte, ni sus vecinos en el hogar, se
aburriese de vivir solo con su mal humor y sus ballesteros en lo alto
de la roca en que sus antepasados colgaron su nido de piedra.

Devanábase noche y día los sesos en busca de alguna distracción propia
de su carácter, lo cual era bastante difícil, después de haberse
cansado como ya lo estaba, de mover guerra á sus vecinos, apalear á
sus servidores y ahorcar á sus súbditos.

En esta ocasión cuentan las crónicas que se le ocurrió, aunque sin
ejemplar, una idea feliz.

Sabiendo que los cristianos de otras poderosas naciones, se aprestaban
á partir juntos en una formidable armada[1] á un país maravilloso para
conquistar el sepulcro de Nuestro Señor Jesucristo, que los moros
tenían en su poder,[2] se determinó á marchar en su seguimiento.

  [Footnote 1: armada = 'fleet.' The reference is probably to the
  first crusade under Godfrey of Bouillon (1096-1099), which resulted
  in the capture of Jerusalem and the temporary establishment of a
  Christian kingdom in Palestine.]

  [Footnote 2: que los moros tenian en su poder. See p. 35, note 4.]

Si realizó esta idea con objeto de purgar sus culpas, que no eran
pocas, derramando su sangre en tan justa empresa, ó con el de
transplantarse á un punto donde sus malas mañas no se conociesen, se
ignora; pero la verdad del caso es que, con gran contentamiento de
grandes y chicos, de vasallos y de iguales, allegó cuanto dinero pudo,
redimió á sus pueblos del señorío, mediante una gruesa cantidad, y no
conservando de propiedad suya más que el peñón del Segre y las cuatro
torres del castillo, herencia de sus padres, desapareció de la noche á
la mañana.

La comarca entera respiró en libertad durante algún tiempo, como si
despertara de una pesadilla.

Ya no colgaban de los árboles de sus sotos, en vez de frutas, racimos
de hombres: las muchachas del pueblo no temían al salir con su cántaro
en la cabeza á tomar agua de la fuente del camino, ni los pastores
llevaban sus rebaños al Segre por sendas impracticables y ocultas,
temblando encontrar á cada revuelta de la trocha á los ballesteros de
su muy amado señor.

Así transcurrió el espacio de tres años; la historia del _mal
caballero_, que sólo por este nombre se le conocía, comenzaba á
pertenecer al exclusivo dominio de las viejas, que en las eternas
veladas del invierno las[1] relataban con voz hueca y temerosa á los
asombrados chicos; las madres asustaban á los pequeñuelos
incorregibles ó llorones diciendoles: _¡que viene el señor del
Segre!_[2] cuando he aquí que no sé si un dia ó una noche, si caído
del cielo ó abortado de los profundos, el temido señor apareció
efectivamente, y como suele decirse, en carne y hueso, en mitad de sus
antiguos vasallos.

  [Footnote 1: las. See vocabulary.]

  [Footnote 2: ¡que viene el señor del Segre! Compare the familiar
  English expression used to frighten children: "The boogy-man is
  coming."]

Renuncio á describir el efecto de esta agradable sorpresa. Ustedes se
lo podrán figurar mejor que yo pintarlo, sólo con decirles que tornaba
reclamando sus vendidos derechos, que si malo se fué, peor volvió, y
si pobre y sin crédito se encontraba antes de partir á la guerra, ya
no podía contar con más recursos que su despreocupación, su lanza y
una media docena de aventureros tan desalmados y perdidos como su
jefe.

Como era natural, los pueblos se resistieron á pagar tributes, que á
tanta costa habían redimido; pero el señor puso fuego á sus heredades,
á sus alquerías y á sus mieses.

Entonces apelaron á la justicia del rey; pero el señor se burlo de las
cartas-leyes de los Condes soberanos;[1] las clavó en el postigo de
sus torres, y colgó á los farsantes de una encina.

  [Footnote 1: Condes soberanos. See p. 121, Note 1.]

Exasperados, y no encontrando otra vía de salvación, por último, se
pusieron de acuerdo entre sí, se encomendaron á la Divina Providencia
y tomaron las armas; pero el señor reunió á sus secuaces, llamó en su
ayuda al diablo, se encaramó á su roca y se preparó á la lucha. Ésta
comenzó terrible y sangrienta. Se peleaba con todas armas, en todos
sitios y á todas horas, con la espada y el fuego, en la montaña y en
la llanura, en el día y durante la noche.

Aquello no era pelear para vivir; era vivir para pelear.

Al cabo triunfó la causa de la justicia. Oigan ustedes cómo.

Una noche obscura, muy obscura, en que no se oía ni un rumor en la
tierra ni brillaba un solo astro en el cielo, los senores de la
fortaleza, engreídos por una reciente victoria, se repartían el botín,
y ebrios con el vapor de los licores en mitad de la loca y estruendosa
orgía, entonaban sacrílegos cantares en loor de su infernal patrono.

Como dejo dicho, nada se oía en derredor del castillo, excepto el eco
de las blasfemias, que palpitaban, perdidas en el sombrío seno de la
noche, como palpitan las almas de los condenados envueltas en los
pliegues del huracán de los infiernos.[1]

  [Footnote 1: huracán de los infiernos. The idea is taken from
  Dante's _Inferno,_ v.

    I came into a place mute of all light,
      Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
      If by opposing winds 't is combated.

    The infernal hurricane that never rests
      Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;
      Whirling them round; and smiting, it molests them.

                    _Longfellow's translation_

  It is to this realm, where the carnal sinners are punished, that
  Dante relegates the lovers Paolo and Francesca da Rimini.]

Ya los descuidados centinelas habian fijado algunas veces sus ojos en
la villa que reposaba silenciosa, y se habian dormido sin temor á una
sorpresa, apoyados en el grueso tronco de sus lanzas, cuando he aquí
que algunos aldeanos, resueltos á morir y protegidos por la sombra,
comenzaron á escalar el cubierto peñón del Segre, á cuya cima tocaron
á punto de la media noche.

Una vez en la cima, lo que faltaba por hacer fué obra de poco tiempo:
los centinelas salvaron de un solo salto el valladar que separa al
sueño de la muerte;[1] el fuego aplicado con teas de resina al puente
y al rastrillo, se comunicó con la rapidez del relámpago á los muros;
y los escaladores, favorecidos por la confusión y abriéndose paso
entre las llamas, dieron fin con los habitantes de aquella guarida en
un abrir y cerrar de ojos.

  [Footnote 1: That is to say, they passed suddenly from sleep to
  death. Tasso uses much the same figure, when he says, in his
  _Gerusalemme Liberata_, ix. 18:

    _Dal sonno a la marts è un picciol varco._
    Small is the gulf that lies 'twixt sleep and death.
  ]

Todos perecieron.

Cuando el cercano día comenzó á blanquear las altas copas de los
enebros, humeaban aún los calcinados escombros de las desplomadas
torres, y á través de sus anchas brechas, chispeando al herirla la luz
y colgada de uno de los negros pilares de la sala del festín, era
fácil divisar la armadura del temido jefe, cuyo cadáver, cubierto de
sangre y polvo, yacía entre los desgarrados tapices y las calientes
cenizas, confundido con los de sus obscuros compañeros.

El tiempo pasó; comenzaron los zarzales á rastrear por los desiertos
patios, la hiedra á enredarse en los obscuros machones, y las
campanillas azules á mecerse colgadas de las mismas almenas. Los
desiguales soplos de la brisa, el graznido de las aves nocturnas y el
rumor de los reptiles, que se deslizaban entre las altas hierbas,
turbaban sólo de vez en cuando el silencio de muerte de aquel lugar
maldecido; los insepultos huesos de sus antiguos moradores blanqueaban
al rayo de la luna, y aún podía verse el haz de armas del señor del
Segre, colgado del negro pilar de la sala del festín.

Nadie osaba tocarle; pero corrían mil fábulas acerca de aquel objeto,
causa incesante de hablillas y terrores para los que le miraban
llamear durante el dia, herido por la luz del sol, ó creían percibir
en las altas horas de la noche el metálico son de sus piezas, que
chocaban entre sí cuando las movía el viento, con un gemido prolongado
y triste.

Á pesar de todos los cuentos que apropósito de la armadura se
fraguaron, y que en voz baja se repetían unos á otros los habitantes
de los alrededores, no pasaban de cuentos, y el único más positivo que
de ellos resulto, se redujo entonces á una dosis de miedo más que
regular, que cada uno de por si se esforzaba en disimular lo posible,
haciendo, como decirse suele, de tripas corazón.

Si de aquí no hubiera pasado la cosa, nada se habría perdido. Pero el
diablo, que á lo que parece no se encontraba satisfecho de su obra,
sin duda. Con el permiso de Dios y á fin de hacer purgar á la comarca
algunas culpas, volvió á tomar cartas en el asunto.

Desde este momento las fábulas, que hasta aquella epoca no pasaron de
un rumor vago y sin viso alguno de verosimilitud, comenzaron á tomar
consistencia y á hacerse de día en día mas probables.

En efecto, hacía algunas noches que todo el pueblo había podido
observar un extraño fenómeno.

Entre las sombras, á lo lejos, ya subiendo las retorcidas cuestas del
peñón del Segre, ya vagando entre las ruinas del castillo, ya
cerniéndose al parecer en los aires, se veían correr, cruzarse,
esconderse y tornar á aparecer para alejarse en distintas direcciones
unas luces misteriosas y fantásticas cuya procedencia nadie sabía
explicar.

Esto se repitió por tres ó cuatro noches durante el intervalo de un
mes; y los confusos aldeanos esperaban inquietos el resultado de
aquellos conciliábulos, que ciertamente no se hizo aguardar mucho,
cuando tres ó cuatro alquerías incendiadas, varias reses desaparecidas
y los cadáveres de algunos caminantes despeñados en los precipicios,
pusieron en alarma todo el territorio en diez leguas á la redonda.

Ya no quedó duda alguna. Una banda de malhechores se albergaba en los
subterráneos del castillo.

Estos, que sólo se presentaban al principio muy de tarde en tarde y en
determinados puntos del bosque que, aún en el día, se dilata á lo
largo de la ribera, concluyeron por ocupar casi todos los desfiladeros
de las montañas, emboscarse en los caminos, saquear los valles y
descender como un torrente á la llanura, donde á éste quiero á éste no
quiero, no dejaban títere con cabeza.

Los asesinatos se multiplicaban; las muchachas desaparecían, y los
niños eran arrancados de las cunas á pesar de los lamentos de sus
madres, para servirlos[1] en diabólicos festines, en que, según la
creencia general, los vasos sagrados[2] sustraídos de las profanadas
iglesias servían de copas.

  [Footnote 1: servirlos. The sacrifice of children has always been
  considered by popular superstition as an essential part in practices
  of black magic or in compacts with the devil.]

  [Footnote 2: los vasos sagrados. The sacred vessels of the church
  are said to play an important part in demonolatry. The consecrated
  wafers too are believed to be put to improper uses.]

El terror llego á apoderarse de los ánimos en un grado tal, que al
toque de oraciones nadie se aventuraba á salir de su casa, en la que
no siempre se creían seguros de los bandidos del peñón.

Mas ¿quiénes eran éstos? ¿De dónde habían venido? ¿Cuál era el nombre
de su misterioso jefe? He aquí el enigma que todos querían explicar y
que nadie podía resolver hasta entonces, aunque se observase desde
luego que la armadura del señor feudal había desaparecido del sitio
que antes ocupara,[1] y posteriormente varios labradores hubiesen
afirmado que el capitán de aquella desalmada gavilla marchaba á su
frente, cubierto con una, que de no ser la misma, se le asemejaba en
un todo.

  [Footnote 1: ocupara See p. 16, note 3.]

Cuanto queda repetido, si se le despoja de esa parte de fantasía con
que el miedo abulta y completa sus creaciones favoritas, nada tiene en
sí de sobrenatural y extraño. ¿Qué cosa más corriente en unos bandidos
que las ferocidades con que estos se distinguían, ni más natural que
el apoderarse su jefe de las abandonadas armas del señor del Segre?

Sin embargo, algunas revelaciones hechas antes de morir por uno de sus
secuaces, prisionero en las últimas refriegas, acabaron de colmar la
medida, preocupando el ánimo de los más incrédulos. Poco más ó menos,
el contenido de su confesión fué éste:--Yo, dijo, pertenezco á una
noble familia. Los extravíos de mi juventud, mis locas prodigalidades
y mis crímenes por último atrajeron sobre mi cabeza la cólera de mis
deudos y la maldición de mi padre, que me desheredó al expirar.
Hallándome solo y sin recursos de ninguna especie, el diablo sin duda
debió sugerirme la idea de reunir algunos jóvenes que se encontraban
en una situación idéntica á la mia, los cuales, seducidos con las
promesas de un porvenir de disipación, libertad, y abundancia, no
vacilaron un instante en suscribir á mis designios.

Éstos se reducían á formar una banda de jóvenes de buen humor,
despreocupados y poco temerosos del peligro, que desde allí en
adelante vivirían alegremente del producto de su valor y á costa del
país, hasta tanto que Dios se sirviera disponer de cada uno de ellos
conforme á su voluntad, según hoy á mí me sucede.

Con este objeto señalamos esta comarca para teatro de nuestras
expediciones futuras, y escogimos como punto el más á proposito para
nuestras reuniones el abandonado castillo del Segre, lugar seguro, no
tanto por su posición fuerte y ventajosa, como por hallarse defendido
contra el vulgo por las supersticiones y el miedo.

Congregados una noche bajo sus ruinosas arcadas, alrededor de una
hoguera que iluminaba con su rojizo resplandor las desiertas galerías,
trabóse una acalorada disputa sobre cuál de nosotros había de ser
elegido jefe.

Cada uno alegó sus méritos; yo expuse mis derechos: ya los unos
murmuraban entre sí con ojeadas amenazadoras; ya los otros con voces
descompuestas por la embriaguez habían puesto la mano sobre el pomo de
sus puñales para dirimir la cuestión, cuando de repente oímos un
extraño crujir de armas, acompañado de pisadas huecas y sonantes, que
de cada vez se hacían más distintas. Todos arrojamos á nuestro
alrededor una inquieta mirada de desconfianza; nos pusimos de pie y
desnudamos nuestros aceros, determinados á vender caras las vidas;
pero no pudimos por menos de permanecer inmóviles al ver adelantarse
con paso firme é igual un hombre de elevada estatura, completamente
armado de la cabeza al pie y cubierto el rostro con la visera del
casco, el cual, desnudando su montante, que dos hombres podrían apenas
manejar, y poniéndole[1] sobre uno de los carcomidos fragmentos de las
rotas arcadas, exclamó con una voz hueca y profunda, semejante al
rumor de una caída de aguas subterráneas:

  [Footnote 1: poniéndole. See p. 66, note 1.]

--Si alguno de vosotros se atreve á ser el primero, mientras yo habite
en el castillo del Segre, que tome esa espada, signo del poder.

Todos guardamos silencio, hasta que, transcurrido el primer momento de
estupor, le proclamamos á grandes voces nuestro capitán, ofreciéndole
una copa de nuestro vino, la cual rehusó por señas, acaso por no
descubrirse la faz, que en vano procuramos distinguir á través de las
rejillas de hierro que la ocultaban á nuestros ojos.

No obstante, aquella noche pronunciamos el más formidable de los
juramentos, y á la siguiente dieron principio nuestras nocturnas
correrías. En ellas nuestro misterioso jefe marchaba siempre delante
de todos. Ni el fuego le ataja, ni los peligros le intimidan, ni las
lágrimas le conmueven: Nunca despliega sus labios; pero cuando la
sangre humea en nuestras manos, como cuando los templos se derrumban
calcinados por las llamas: cuando las mujeres huyen espantadas entre
las ruinas, y los niños arrojan gritos de dolor, y los ancianos
perecen á nuestros golpes, contesta con una carcajada de feroz alegría
á los gemidos, á las imprecaciones y á los lamentos.

Jamás se desnuda de sus armas ni abate la visera de su casco después
de la victoria, ni participa del festín, ni se entrega al sueño. Las
espadas que le hieren se hunden entre las piezas de su armadura, y ni
le causan la muerte, ni se retiran teñidas en sangre; el fuego
enrojece su espaldar y su cota, y aún prosigue impávido entre las
llamas, buscando nuevas víctimas; desprecia el oro, aborrece la
hermosura, y no le inquieta la ambición.

Entre nosotros, unos le creen un extravagante; otros un noble
arruinado, que por un resto de pudor se tapa la cara; y no falta quien
se encuentra convencido de que es el mismo diablo en persona.

El autor de esas revelaciones murió con la sonrisa de la mofa en los
labios y sin arrepentirse de sus culpas; varios de sus iguales le
siguieron en diversas épocas al suplicio; pero el temible jefe, à
quien continuamente se unían nuevos prosélitos, no cesaba en sus
desastrosas empresas.

Los infelices habitantes de la comarca, cada vez mas aburridos y
desesperados, no acertaban ya con la determinación que debería tomarse
para concluir de un todo con aquel orden de cosas, cada día más
insoportable y triste.

Inmediato á la villa, y oculto en el fondo de un espeso bosque, vivía
á esta sazón, en una pequeña ermita dedicada á San Bartolomé[1] un
santo hombre, de costumbres piadosas y ejemplares, á quien el pueblo
tuvo siempre en olor de santidad, merced á sus saludables consejos y
acertadas predicciones.

  [Footnote 1: San Bartolome. See p. 29, note 2.]

Este venerable ermitaño, á cuya prudencia y proverbial sabiduría
encomendaron los vecinos de Bellver la resolución de este difícil
problema, después de implorar la misericordia divina por medio de su
santo Patrono, que, como ustedes no ignoran, conoce al diablo muy de
cerca, y en más de una ocasión le ha atado bien corto,[1] les aconsejó
que se emboscasen durante la noche al pie del pedregoso camino que
sube serpenteando por la roca, en cuya cima se encontraba el castillo,
encargándoles al mismo tiempo que ya allí, no hiciesen uso de otras
armas para aprehenderlo que de una maravillosa oración que les hizo
aprender de memoria, y con la cual aseguraban las cronicas que San
Bartolome habia hecho al diablo su prisionero.'

  [Footnote 1: le ha atado bien corto... su prisionero. See p. 29,
  note 2.]

Púsose en planta el proyecto, y su resultado excedió á cuantas
esperanzas se habían concebido; pues aún no iluminaba el sol del otro
día la alta torre de Bellver, cuando sus habitantes, reunidos en
grupos en la plaza Mayor,[1] se contaban unos á otros con aire de
misterio, cómo aquella noche fuertemente atado de pies y manos y á
lomos de una poderosa mula, había entrado en la población el famoso
capitán de los bandidos del Segre.

  [Footnote 1: la plaza Mayor. The name of the principal square of the
  town.]

De qué arte se valieron los acometedores de esta empresa para llevarla
á término, ni nadie se lo acertaba á explicar, ni ellos mismos podían
decirlo; pero el hecho era que, gracias á la oración del santo ó al
valor de sus devotos, la cosa había sucedido tal como se refería.

Apenas la novedad comenzó á extenderse de boca en boca y de casa en
casa, la multitud se lanzo á las calles con ruidosa algazara, y corrió
á reunirse á las puertas de la prisión. La campana de la parroquia
llamó á concejo, y los vecinos más respetables se juntaron en
capitulo, y todos aguardaban ansiosos la hora en que el reo había de
comparecer ante sus improvisados jueces.

Éstos, que se encontraban autorizados por los condes de Urgel[1] para
administrarse por sí mismos pronta y severa justicia sobre aquellos
malhechores, deliberaron un momento, pasado el cual, mandaron
comparecer al delincuente á fin de notificarle su sentencia.

  [Footnote 1: condes de Urgel. See p. 118, note 1.]

Como dejo dicho, así en la plaza Mayor, como en las calles por donde
el prisionero debía atravesar para dirigirse al punto en que sus
jueces se encontraban, la impaciente multitud hervía como un apiñado
enjambre de abejas. Especialmente en la puerta de la cárcel, la
conmoción popular tomaba cada vez mayores proporciones, y ya los
animados diálogos, los sordos murmullos y los amenazadores gritos
comenzaban á poner en cuidado á sus guardas, cuando afortunadamente
llego la orden de sacar al reo.

Al aparecer éste bajo el macizo arco de la portada de su prisión,
completamente vestido de todas armas y cubierto el rostro con la
visera, un sordo y prolongado murmullo de admiración y de sorpresa se
elevo de entre las compactas masas del pueblo, que se abrían con
dificultad para dejarle paso.

Todos habían reconocido en aquella armadura la del señor del Segre;
aquella armadura, objeto de las más sombrias tradiciones mientras se
la via suspendida de los arruinados muros de la fortaleza maldita.

Las armas eran aquellas, no cabía duda alguna; todos habían visto
flotar el negro penacho de su cimera en los combates, que en un
tiempo[1] trabaran[2] contra su señor; todos le habían visto agitarse
al soplo de la brisa del crepúsculo, á par de la hiedra del calcinado
pilar en que quedaron colgadas á la muerte de su dueño. Más ¿quién
podría ser el desconocido personaje que entonces las llevaba? Pronto
iba á saberse: al menos así se creía. Los sucesos dirán cómo esta
esperanza quede frustrada, á la manera de otras muchas, y porqué de
este solemne acto de justicia, del que debía aguardarse el completo
esclarecimiento de la verdad, resultaran nuevas y más inexplicables
confusiones.

  [Footnote 1: en un tiempo = 'once upon a time.']

  [Footnote 2: See p. 16, note 3.]

El misterioso bandido penetró al fín en la sala del concejo, y un
silencio profundo sucedió á los rumores que se elevaran[1] de entre
los circunstantes, al oir resonar bajo las altas bóvedas de aquel
recinto el metálico son de sus acicates de oro. Uno de los que
componían el tribunal con voz lenta é insegura, le preguntó su nombre,
y todos prestaron el oído con ansiedad para no perder una sola palabra
de su respuesta; pero el guerrero se limitó á encoger sus hombros
ligeramente con un aire de desprecio e insulto, que no pudo menos de
irritar á sus jueces, los que se miraron entre sí sorprendidos.

  [Footnote 1: elevaran, dirigiera. See p. 16, note 3.]

Tres veces volvió á repetirle la pregunta, y otras tantas obtuvo
semejante ó parecida contestación.

--¡Que se levante la visera! ¡Que se descubra! ¡Que se descubra!
comenzaron á gritar los vecinos de la villa presentes al acto. ¡Que se
descubra! ¡Veremos si se atreve entonces á insultarnos con su desden,
como ahora lo hace protegido por el incógnito!

--Descubríos, repitió el mismo que anteriormente le dirigiera[1] la
palabra.

  [Footnote 1: elevaran, dirigiera. See p. 16, note 3.]

El guerrero permaneció impasible.

--Os lo mando en el nombre de nuestra autoridad.

La misma contestación.

--En el de los condes soberanos.'[1]

  [Footnote 1: condes soberanos. See p. 121, note i, and p. 123,
  1.22.]

Ni por ésas.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Ni por ésas = 'Nor did these (threats) avail.']

La indignación llegó á su colmo, hasta el punto que uno de sus
guardas, lanzándose sobre el reo, cuya pertinacia en callar bastaría
para apurar la paciencia á un santo, le abrió violentamente la visera.
Un grito general de sorpresa se escapó del auditorio, que permaneció
por un instante herido de un inconcebible estupor.

La cosa no era para menos.

El casco, cuya férrea visera se veía en parte levantada hasta la
frente, en parte caída sobre la brillante gola de acero, estaba
vacío...completamente vacío.

Cuando pasado ya el primer momento de terror quisieron tocarle, la
armadura se estremeció ligeramente, y descomponiéndose en piezas, cayó
al suelo con un ruido sordo y extraño.

La mayor parte de los espectadores, á la vista del nuevo prodigio,
abandonaron tumultuosamente Ia habitación y salieron despavoridos á la
plaza.

La nueva se divulgó con la rapidez del pensamiento entre la multitud,
que aguardaba impaciente el resultado-del juicio; y fué tal la alarma,
la revuelta y la vocería, que ya á nadie cupo duda sobre lo que de
pública voz se aseguraba, esto es, que el diablo, á la muerte del
señor del Segre, había heredado los feudos de Bellver.

Al fin se apaciguó el tumulto, y decidióse volver á un calabozo la
maravillosa armadura.

Ya en él[1] despacháronse cuatro emisarios, que en representacion de
la atribulada villa hiciesen presente el caso al conde de Urgel y al
arzobispo, los que no tardaron muchos días en tornar con la resolución
de estos personajes, resolución que, como suele decirse, era breve y
compendiosa.

  [Footnote 1: Ya en él. A bold ellipsis which would be inconsistent
  with common usage in English.]

--Cuélguese, les dijeron, la armadura en la plaza Mayor de la villa;
que si el diablo la ocupa, fuerza le serà el abandonarla ó ahorcarse
con ella.

Encantados los habitantes de Bellver con tan ingeniosa solución,
volvieron á reunirse en concejo, mandaron levantar una altísima horca
en la plaza, y cuando ya la multitud ocupaba sus avenidas, se
dirigieron á la cárcel por la armadura, en corporación y con toda la
solemnidad que la importancia del caso requería.

Cuando la respetable comitiva llego al macizo arco que daba entrada al
edificio, un hombre pálido y descompuesto se arrojó al suelo en
presencia de los aturdidos circunstantes, exclamando con las lágrimas
en los ojos:

--Perdón, señores, perdón!

--Perdón!; ¿Para quién? dijeron algunos; ¿para, el diablo, que habita
dentro de la armadura del señor del Segre?

--Para mí, prosiguió con voz trémula el infeliz, en quien todos
reconocieron al alcaide de las prisiones; para mí... porque las
armas... ban desaparecido.

Al oir estas palabras, el asombro se pintó en el rostro de cuantos se
encontraban en el pórtico, que, mudos é inmóviles, hubieran
permanecido en la posición en que se encontraban, Dios sabe hasta
cuãndo, si la siguiente relación del aterrado guardián no les hubiera
hecho agruparse en su alrededor para escuchar con avidez:

Perdonadme, señores, decía el pobre alcaide; y yo no os ocultaré nada,
siquiera sea en contra mia.

Todos guardaron silencio, y él prosiguio así:

--Yo no acertaré nunca á dar la razón; pero es el caso que la historia
de las armas vacías me pareció siempre una fábula tejida en favor de
algún noble personaje, á quien tal vez altas razones de conveniencia
pública no permitían ni descubrir ni castigar.

En esta creencia estuve siempre, creencia en que no podía menos de
confirmarme la inmovilidad en que se encontraban desde que por segunda
vez tornaron á la cárcel traídas del concejo. En vano una noche y
otra, deseando sorprender su misterio, si misterio en ellas había, me
levantaba poco á poco y aplicaba el oido á los intersticios de la
ferrada puerta de su calabozo; ni un rumor se percibía.

En vano procuré observarlas á través de un pequeñio agujero producido
en el muro; arrojadas sobre un poco de paja y en uno de los más
obscures rincones, permanecian un día y otro descompuestas é
inmóviles.

Una noche, por último, aguijoneado por la curiosidad y deseando
convencerme por mí mismo de que aquel objeto de terror nada tenia de
misterioso, encendi una linterna, bajé a las prisiones, levante sus
dobles aldabas, y no cuidando siquiera--tanta era mi fe en que todo no
pasaba de un cuento--de cerrar las puertas tras mí, penetré en el
calabozo. Nunca lo hubiera hecho; apenas anduve algunos pasos, la luz
de mi linterna se apagó por sí sola, y mis dientes comenzaron á
chocar, y mis cabellos á erizarse. Turbando el profundo silencio que
me rodeaba, había oído como un ruido de hierros, que se removían y
chocaban al unirse entre las sombras.

Mi primer movimiento fué arrojarme á la puerta para cerrar el paso,
pero al asir sus hojas, sentí sobre mis hombros una mano formidable
cubierta-con un guantelete, que después de sacudirme con violencia me
derribó sobre el dintel. Allí permanecí hasta la mañana siguiente, que
me encontraron mis servidores falto de sentido, y recordando sólo que
despues de mi caída, había creído percibir confusamente como unas
pisadas sonoras, al compás de las cuales resonaba un rumor de
espuelas, que poco á poco se fué alejando hasta perderse.

Cuando concluyó el alcaide, reinó un silencio profundo, al que siguió
luego un infernal concierto de lamentaciones, gritos y amenazas.

Trabajo costó á los más pacificos el contener al pueblo que, furioso
con la novedad, pedía á grandes voces la muerte del curioso autor de
su nueva desgracia.

Al cabo logróse apaciguar el tumulto, y comenzaron á disponerse á una
nueva persecutión. Ésta obtuvo también un resultado satisfactorio.

Al cabo de algunos días, la armadura volvió á encontrarse en poder de
sus perseguidores. Conocida la fórmula, y mediante la ayuda de San
Bartolomé,[1] la cosa no era ya muy difícil.

  [Footnote 1: San Bartolomé. See p. 29, note 2.]

Pero aún quedaba algo por hacer: pues en vano, á fin de sujetarlo, lo
colgaron de una horca; en vano emplearon la más exquisita vigilancia
con el objeto de quitarle toda ocasión de escaparse por esos mundos.
En cuanto las desunidas armas veían dos dedos de luz, se encajaban, y
pian pianito volvían á tomar el trote y emprender de nuevo sus
excursiones por montes y llanos, que era una bendición del cielo.

Aquello era el cuento de nunca acabar.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Aquello era el cuento de nunca acabar = 'It was a
  never-ending story.' One of the sort that seems to reach a climax
  only to begin over again.]

En tan angustiosa situación, los vecinos se repartieron entre sí las
piezas de la armadura, que acaso por la centésima vez se encontraba en
sus manos, y rogando[1] al piadoso eremita, que un día los iluminó con
sus consejos, decidiera lo que debía hacerse de ella.

  [Footnote 1: y rogando. A careless and incorrect construction which
  leaves the sentence incomplete. Better y rogaron. Notice the
  omission of the conjunction que before the subjunctive decidiera.
  This is a frequent Spanish usage.]

El santo varón ordeno al pueblo una penitencia general. Se encerré por
tres días en el fondo de una caverna que le servía de asilo, y al cabo
de ellos dispuso que se fundiesen las diabólicas armas, y con ellas y
algunos sillares del castillo del Segre, se levantase una cruz.

La operación se llevo á término, aunque no sin que nuevos y
aterradores prodigies llenasen de pavor el animo de los consternados
habitantes de Bellver.

En tanto que las piezas arrojadas á las llamas comenzaban á
enrojecerse, largos y profundos gemidos parecían escaparse de la ancha
hoguera, de entre cuyos troncos saltaban[1] como si estuvieran vivas y
sintiesen la acción del fuego. Una tromba de chispas rojas, verdes y
azules danzaba en la cúspidede sus encendidas lenguas, y se retorcían
crujiendo como si una legión de diablos, cabalgando sobre ellas,
pugnasen por libertar á su señor de aquel tormento.

  [Footnote 1: saltaban. The antecedent must be piezas, although it is
  too remote to be obvious. Such loose constructions are not to be
  recommended. ]

Extraña, horrible fué la operación, en tanto que la candente armadura
perdía su forma para tomar la de una cruz.

Los martillos, caían resonando con un espantoso estruendo sobre el
yunque, al que veinte trabajadores vigorosos sujetaban las barras del
hirviente metal, que palpitaba y gemía al sentir los golpes.

Ya se extendían los brazos del signo de nuestra redención, ya
comenzaba á formarse la cabecera, cuando la diabólica y encendida masa
se retorcía de nuevo como en una convulsión espantosa, y rodeándose al
cuerpo de los desgraciados, que pugnaban por desasirse de sus brazos
de muerte, se enroscaba en anillas como una culebra, ó se contraía en
zigzag como un relámpago.

El constante trabajo, la fe, las oraciones y el agua bendita
consiguieron, por último, vencer el espíritu infernal y la armadura se
convirtió en cruz.

Esa cruz es la que hoy habéis visto, y á la cual se encuentra sujeto
el diablo que le presta su nombre; ante ella, ni las jóvenes colocan
en el mes de Mayo[1] ramilletes de lirios, ni los pastores se
descubren al pasar, ni los ancianos se arrodillan, bastando apenas las
severas amonestaciones del clero para que los muchachos no la
apedreen.

  [Footnote 1: en el mes de Mayo. To celebrate the festival of
  May-day.]

Dios ha cerrado sus oídos á cuantas plegarias se le dirijan en su
presencia. En el invierno los lobos se reunen en manadas junto al
enebro que la protege, para lanzarse sobre las reses; los bandidos
esperan á su sombra á los caminantes, que entierran á su pie después
que los asesinan; y cuando la tempestad se desata, los rayos tuercen
su camino para liarse, silbando, al asta de esa cruz y romper los
sillares de su pedestal.




CREED EN DIOS




CÁNTIGA PROVENZAL


Yo fuí el verdadero Teobaldo de Montagut, barón de Fortcastell.[1]
Noble ó villano, señor ó pechero, tú, cualquiera que seas, que te
detienes un instante al borde de mi sepultura, cree en Dios, como yo
he creído, y ruégale por mí.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut, barón de Fortcastell. The name of
  Teobaldo, does not figure in mediaeval Catalonia, nor the barony of
  Fortcastell. This inscription is probably a literary fiction.]



I


Nobles aventureros, que puesta la lanza en la cuja, caída la visera
del casco y jinetes sobre un corcel poderoso, recorréis la tierra sin
más patrimonio que vuestro nombre clarísimo y vuestro montante,
buscando honra y prez en la profesión de las armas; si al atravesar el
quebrado valle de Montagut [Foonote: 1] os han sorprendido en él la
tormenta y la noche, y habéis encontrado un refugio en las ruinas del
monasterio que aún se ve en su fondo, oidme.

  [Footnote 1: Montagut. The mountains of Montagut, which rise to a
  height of 3125 teet, are situated in the province of Tarragona,
  Spain.]



II


Pastores, que seguís con lento paso vuestras ovejas que pacen
derramadas por las colinas y las llanuras; si al conducirlas al borde
del transparente riachuelo que corre, forcejea y salta por entre los
peíiascos del valle de Montagut en el rigor del verano, y en una
siesta de fuego habéis encontrado la sombra y el reposo al pie de las
derruídas arcadas del monasterio, cuyos musgosos pilares besan las
ondas, oidme.



III


Niñas de las cercanas aldeas, lírios silvestres que crecéis felices al
abrigo de vuestra humildad; si en la mañana del santo Patrono de estos
lugares, al bajar al valle de Montagut á coger tréboles y margaritas
con que embellecer su retablo, venciendo el temor que os inspira el
sombrío monasterio que se alza en sus peñas, habéis penetrado en su
claustro mudo y desierto para vagar entre sus abandonadas tumbas, á
cuyos bordes crecen las margaritas más dobles y los jacintos mas
azules, oidme.



IV


Tú, noble caballero, tal vez al resplandor de un relámpago; tú, pastor
errante, calcinado por los rayos del sol; tú, en fin, hermosa niña,
cubierta aún con gotas de rocío semejantes á lágrimas, todas habréis
visto en aquel santo lugar una tumba, una tumba humilde. Antes la
componían una piedra tosca y una cruz de palo; la cruz ha
desaparecido, y sólo queda la piedra. En esa tumba, cuya inscripción
es el mote de mi canto, reposa en paz el último barón de Fortcastell,
Teobaldo de Montagut,[1] del cual voy á referiros la peregrina
historia.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut. See p, 140, note I.]

       *       *       *       *       *


I


Cuando la noble condesa de Montagut estaba en cinta de su primogénito
Teobaldo, tuvo un ensueño misterioso y terrible. Acaso un aviso de
Dios; tal vez una vana fantasía, que el tiempo realizó más adelante.
Soñó que en su seno engendraba una serpiente, una serpiente monstruosa
que, arrojando agudos silbidos, y ora arrastrándose entre la menuda
hierba, ora replegándose sobre sí misma para saltar, huyó de su vista,
escondiéndose al fin entre unas zarzas.

--¡Allí está! ¡allí está! gritaba la condesa en su horrible pesadilla,
señalando á sus servidores la zarza en que se había escondido el
asqueroso reptil.

Cuando sus servidores llegaron presurosos al punto que la noble dama,
inmóvil y presa de un profundo terror, les señalaba aún con el dedo,
una blanca paloma se levantó de entre las breñas y se remontó á las
nubes.

La serpiente había desaparecido.



II


Teobaldo vino al mundo, su madre murió al darlo á luz, su padre
pereció algunos años después en una emboscada, peleando como bueno
contra los enemigos de Dios.[1]

  [Footnote 1: los enemigos de Dios. The Moors are meant here.]

Desde este punto la juventud del primogénito de Fortcastell sólo puede
compararse á un huracán. Por donde pasaba se veía señalando su camino
un rastro de lágrimas y de sangre. Ahorcaba á sus pecheros, se batía
con sus iguales, perseguía á las doncellas, daba de palos á los
monjes, y en sus blasfemias y juramentos ni dejaba Santo en paz ni
cosa sagrada que no maldijese.



III


Un día en que salió de caza, y que, como era su costumbre, hizo entrar
á guarecerse de la lluvia á toda su endiablada comitiva de pajes
licenciosos, arqueros desalmados y siervos envilecidos, con perros,
caballos y gerifaltes, en la iglesia de una aldea de sus dominios, un
venerable sacerdote, arrostrando su cólera y sin temer los violentos
arranques de su carácter impetuoso, le conjuro en nombre del cielo y
llevando una hostia consagrada en sus manos, á que abandonase aquel
lugar y fuese á pie y con un bordón de romero á pedir al Papa la
absolución de sus culpas.

--¡Déjame en paz, viejo loco! exclamó Teobaldo al oirle; déjame en
paz; ó ya que no he encontrado una sola pieza durante el día, te
suelto mis perros y te cazo como á un jabalí para distraerme.




IV


Teobaldo era hombre de hacer lo que decía. El sacerdote, sin embargo,
se limitó á contestarle:--Haz lo que quieras, pero ten presente que
hay un Dios que castiga y perdona, y que si muero á tus manos borrará
mis culpas del libro de su indignación, para escribir tu nombre y
hacerte expiar tu crimen.

--¡Un Dios que castiga y perdona! prorrumpió el sacrílego barón con
una carcajada. Vo no creo en Dios, y para darte una prueba voy á
cumplirte lo que te he prometido; porque aunque poco rezador, soy
amigo de no faltar á mis palabras. ¡Raimundo! ¡Gerardo! ¡Pedro! Azuzad
la jauría, dadme el venablo, tocad el _alali_ en vuestras trompas, que
vamos á darle caza á este imbécil, aunque se suba á los retablos de
sus altares.



V


Ya después de dudar un instante y á una nueva orden de su señor,
comenzaban los pajes á desatar los lebreles, que aturdían la iglesia
con sus ladridos; ya el barón había armado su ballesta riendo con una
lisa de Satanás, y el venerable sacerdote, murmurando una plegaria,
elevaba sus ojos al cielo y esperaba tranquilo la muerte, cuando se
oyó fuera del sagrado recinto una vocería horrible, bramidos de
trompas que hacían señales de ojeo, y gritos de _¡Al jabali!--¡Por Zas
breñas!--¡Hacia el monte!_ Teobaldo, al anuncio de la deseada res,
corrió á las puertas del santuario, ebrio de alegría; tras él fueron
sus servidores, y con sus servidores los caballos y los lebreles.



VI


--¡Por dónde va el jabalí? preguntó el barón subiendo á su corcel, sin
apoyarse en el estribo ni desarmar la ballesta.--Por la cañada que se
extiende al pie de esas colinas, le respondieron. Sin escuchar la
última palabra, el impetuoso cazador hundió su acicate de oro en el
ijar del caballo, que partió al escape. Tras él partieron todos.

Los habitantes de la aldea, que fueron los primeros en dar la voz de
alarma, y que al aproximarse el terrible animal se habían guarecido en
sus chozas, asomaron tímidamente la cabeza á los quicios de sus
ventanas; y cuando vieron desaparecer la infernal comitiva por entre
el follaje de la espesura, se santiguaron en silencio.



VII


Teobaldo iba delante de todos. Su corcel, más ligero ó más castigado
que los de sus servidores, seguía tan de cerca á la res, que dos ó
tres veces, dejándole la brida sobre el cuello al fogoso bruto, se
había empinado sobre los estribos, y echádose al hombro la ballesta
para herirlo. Pero el jabalí, al que sólo divisaba á intervalos entre
los espesos matorrales, tomaba á desaparecer de su vista para
mostrársele de nuevo fuera del alcance de su armas.

Así corrió muchas horas, atravesó las cañadas del valle y el pedregoso
lecho del río, é internándose en un bosque inmenso, se perdió entre
sus sombrías revueltas, siempre fijos los ojos en la codiciada res,
siempre creyendo alcanzarla, siempre viéndose burlado por su agilidad
maravillosa.



VIII


Por último, pudo encontrar una ocasión propicia; tendió el brazo y
voló la saeta, que fué á clavarse temblando en el lomo del terrible
animal, que dió un salto y un espantoso bufido.--¡Muerto está! exclama
con un grito de alegría el cazador, volviendo á hundir por la
centésima vez el acicate en el sangriento ijar de su caballo; ¡muerto
está! en balde huye. El rastro de la sangre que arroja marca su
camino. Y esto diciendo, comenzó á hacer en la bocina la señal del
triunfo para que la oyesen sus servidores.

En aquel instante el corcel se detuvo, flaquearon sus piernas, un
ligero temblor agitó sus contraídos músculos, cayó al suelo
desplomado, arrojando por la hinchada nariz cubierta de espuma un caño
de sangre.

Había muerto de fatiga, había muerto cuando la carrera del herido
jabalí comenzaba á acortarse; cuando bastaba un solo esfuerzo más para
alcanzarlo.



IX


Pintar la ira del colérico Teobaldo, sería imposible. Repetir sus
maldiciones y sus blasfemias, sólo repetirlas, fuera escandaloso é
impío. Llamó á grandes voces á sus servidores, y únicamente le
contestó el eco en aquellas inmensas soledades, y se arrancó los
cabellos y se mesó las barbas, presa de la más espantosa
desesperación.--Le seguiré á la carrera, aun cuando haya de
reventarme, exclamo al fin, armando de nuevo su ballesta y
disponiéndose á seguir á la res; pero en aquel momento sintió ruido á
sus espaldas; se entreabrieron las ramas de la espesura, y se presentó
á sus ojos un paje que traía del diestro un corcel negro como la
noche.

--El cielo me lo envía, dijo el cazador, lanzándose sobre sus lomos
ágil como un gamo. El paje, que era delgado, muy delgado, y amarillo
como la muerte, se sonrió de una manera extraña al presentarle la
brida.



X


El caballo relinchó con una fuerza que hizo estremecer el bosque, dió
un bote increíble, un bote en que se levantó más de diez varas del
suelo, y el aire comenzó á zumbar en los oídos del jinete, como zumba
una piedra arrojada por la honda. Había partido al escape; pero á un
escape tan rápido, que temeroso de perder los estribos y caer á tierra
turbado por el vértigo, tuvo que cerrar los ojos y agarrarse con ambas
manos á sus[1] flotantes crines.

  [Footnote 1: sus. The antecedent is logically, but not grammatically
  evident.]

Y sin agitar sus riendas, sin herirle con el acicate ni animarlo con
la voz, el corcel corría, corría sin detenerse. ¿Cuanto tiempo corrió
Teobaldo con él, sin saber por donde, sintiendo que las ramas le
abofeteaban el rostro al pasar, y los zarzales desgarraban sus
vestidos, y el viento silbaba á su alrededor? Nadie lo sabe.



XI


Cuando recobrando el ánimo, abrió los ojos un instante para arrojar en
torno suyo una mirada inquieta, se encontró lejos, muy lejos de
Montagut, y en unos lugares, para él completamente extraños. El corcel
corría, corría sin detenerse, y árboles, rocas, castillos y aldeas
pasaban á su lado como una exhalación. Nuevos y nuevos horizontes se
abrían ante su vista; horizontes que se borraban para dejar lugar á
otros más y más desconocidos. Valles angostos, erizados de colosales
fragmentos de granito que las tempestades habian arrancado de la
cumbre de las montañas, alegres campiñas, cubiertas de un tapiz de
verdura y sembradas de blancos caseríos; desiertos sin límites, donde
hervían las arenas calcinadas por los rayos de un sol de fuego; vastas
soledades, llanuras inmensas, regiones de eternas nieves, donde los
gigantescos témpanos asemejaban, destacándose sobre un cielo gris y
obscuro, blancos fantasmas que extendían sus brazos para asirle por
los cabellos al pasar; todo esto, y mil y mil otras cosas que yo no
podré deciros, vió en su fantástica carrera, hasta tanto que envuelto
en una niebla obscura; dejó de percibir el ruido que producían los
cascos del caballo al herir la tierra.

       *       *       *       *       *



I


Nobles caballeros, sencillos pastores, hermosas niñas que escucháis mi
relato, si os maravilla lo que os cuento, no creáis que es una fábula
tejida á mi antojo para sorprender vuestra credulidad; de boca en boca
ha llegado hasta mí esta tradición, y la leyenda del sepulcro[1] que
aún subsiste en el monasterio de Montagut, es un testimonio
irrecusable de la veracidad de mis palabras.

  [Footnote 1: la leyenda del sepulcro. See p. 140, note 1.]

Creed, pues, lo que he dicho, y creed lo que aún me resta por decir,
que es tan cierto como lo anterior, aunque más maravilloso. Yo podré
acaso adornar con algunas galas de la poesía el desnudo esqueleto de
esta sencilla y terrible historia, pero nunca me apartaré un punto de
la verdad á sabiendas.



II


Cuando Teobaldo dejó de percibir las pisadas de su corcel y se sintió
lanzado en el vacío, no pudo reprimir un involuntario estremecimiento
de terror. Hasta entonces había creído que los objetos que se
representaban á sus ojos eran fantasmas de su imaginación, turbada por
el vértigo, y que su corcel corría desbocado, es verdad, pero corría,
sin salir del término de su señorío. Ya no le quedaba duda de que era
el juguete de un poder sobrenatural que le arrastraba sin que supiese
á dónde, á través de aquellas nieblas obscuras, de aquellas nubes de
formas caprichosas y fantásticas, en cuyo seno, que se iluminaba á
veces con el resplandor de un relámpago, creía distinguir las
hirvientes centellas, próximas á desprenderse.

El corcel corría, ó mejor dicho nadaba en aquel océano de vapores
caliginosos y encendidos, y las maravillas del cielo ro comenzaron á
desplegarse unas tras otras ante los espantados ojos de su jinete.



III


Cabalgando sobre las nubes, vestidos de luengas túnicas con orlas de
fuego, suelta al huracán la encendida cabellera, y blandiendo sus
espadas que relampagueaban arrojando chispas de cárdena luz, vio á los
ángeles, ministros de la cólera del Señor, cruzar como un formidable
ejército sobre alas de la tempestad.

Y subió más alto, y creyó divisar á lo lejos las tormentosas nubes
semejantes á un mar de lava, y oyó mugir el trueno á sus pies como
muge el océano azotando la roca desde cuya cima le contempla el
atónito peregrino.



IV


Y vió el arcángel, blanco como la nieve, que sentado sobre un inmenso
globo de cristal,[1] lo dirige por el espacio en las noches serenas,
como un bajel de plata sobre la superficie de un lago azul.

  [Footnote 1: globo de cristal. The moon. Longfellow thus translates
  Dante's description of the sphere of the moon in canto II of the
  _Paradiso:_

    It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,
    Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright
    As adamant on which the sun is striking.
    Into itself did the eternal pearl
    Receive us...

  ]

Y vió el sol volteando encendido sobre ejes de oro en una atmósfera de
colores y de fuego, y en su foco á los ígneos espíritus[1] que habitan
incólumes entre las llamas, y desde su ardiente seno entonan al
Criador himnos de alegría.

  [Footnote 1: ígneos espíritus. These are not elemental spirits (see
  p.47, note 1), but are either angelic beings of a fiery nature, or
  the spirits of the blessed in the sphere of the sun, of whom Dante
  speaks as follows:

    Lights many saw, vivid and triumphant,
      Make us a center and themselves a circle,
      More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect,

    Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,
      Are many jewels found, so fair and precious
      They cannot be transported from the realm;

    And of them was the singing of these lights.
                    _Dante's Paradiso, canto X, Longfellow's translation._]

Vió los hilos de luz imperceptibles que atan los hombres á las
estrellas,[1] y vió el arco íris, echado como un puente colosal sobre
el abismo que separa al primer cielo del segundo.[2]

  [Footnote 1: A reference doubtless to the power of the stars to
  influence the destiny of man, with which subject astrology concerns
  itself. Compare--

    That which Timasus argues of the soul
      Doth not resemble that which here is seen,
      Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.

    He says the soul unto its star returns,
      Believing it to have been severed thence
      Whenever nature gave it as a form.

    Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise
      Than the words sound, and possibly may be
      With meaning that is not to be derided.

    If he doth mean that to these wheels return
      The honor of their influence and the blame,
      Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.

    O glorious stars, O light impregnated
      With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge
      All my genius, whatso'er it be.

                    _Idem, canto's IV and XXII._]

  [Footnote 2: primer cielo, segundo. Belief in a series of heavenly
  spheres, such as Dante describes, has characterized most mystical
  philosophies.]



V


Por una escala[1] misteriosa vió bajar las almas á la tierra; vió
bajar muchas, y subir pocas.[2] Cada una de aquellas almas inocentes
iba acompañada de un arcángel purísimo que le cubría con la sombra de
sus alas. Los que tornaban solos, tornaban en silencio y con lágrimas
en los ojos; los que no, subían cantando como suben las alondras en
las mañanas de Abril?[3]

  [Footnote 1: escala. Dante mentions a similar stairway in canto XXII
  of the _Paradiso_, and intimates that the vision of it is disclosed
  only to true mystics.

    He thereupon: "Brother, thy high desire
      In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,
      Where are fulfilled all others and my own.

    There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,
      Every desire; within that one alone
      Is every part where it has always been;

    For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,
      And unto it our stairway reaches up,
      thus from out thy sight it steals away.

    Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it
      Extending its supernal part, whst time
      So thronged with angels it appeared to him.

    But to ascend it now no one uplifts
      His feet from off the earth...."

                    _Longfellow's translation_.]

  [Footnote 2: pocas. Because, in comparison with the number of souls
  born into earthly bodies, but few escape the snares of evil and rise
  again to their original state of innocence.]

  [Footnote 3: Though the idea is somewhat different, there is a
  certain parallelism in the picture evoked by the closing verses of
  Rossetti's poem "The Blessed Damozel." The Damozel is represented as
  waiting for her lover on the ramparts of heaven.

    She gazed and listened and then said,
      Less sad of speech than mild,--

    "All this is when he comes." She ceased.
      The light thrilled towards her, fill'd

    With angels in strong level flight.
      Her eyes prayed, and she smiled.

    (I saw her smile.) But soon their path
      Was vague in distant spheres:

    And then she cast her arms along
      The golden barriers,

    And laid her face between her hands,
      And wept. (I heard her tears.)

  ]

Después las tinieblas rosadas y azules que flotaban en el espacio,
como cortinas de gasa transparente, se rasgaron como el día de
gloria[1] se rasga en nuestros templos el velo de los altares, y el
paraíso de los justos se ofreció á sus miradas deslumbrador y
magnifico.[2]

  [Footnote 1: el día de gloria. Called also _Sábado de gloria_, 'Holy
  Saturday.' "During the last two weeks of Lent, the pictures and
  statues throughout the Catholic Church are covered by a purple cloth
  and uncovered on Holy Saturday. In parts of Spain this unveiling is
  effected suddenly by rending them with a spear or lance, so as to
  reveal all the pictures and statues at the same time." Hence the
  comparison.]

  [Footnote 2: Read Dante's description in canto XXXII of the
  _Paradiso_]



VI


Allí estaban los santos profetas que habréis visto groseramente
esculpidos en las portadas de piedra de nuestras catedrales; allí las
vírgenes luminosas,[1] que intenta en vano copiar de sus sueños el
pintor en los vidrios de colores de las ojivas; allí los
querubines,[2] con sus largas y flotantes vestidura? y sus nimbos de
oro, como los de las tablas de los altares; allí, en fin, coronada de
estrellas, vestida de luz, rodeada de todas las jerarquías celestes, y
hermosa sobre toda ponderación, Nuestra Señora de Monserrat,[3] la
Madre de Dios, la Reina de los arcángeles, el amparo de los pecadores
y el consuelo de los afligidos.[4]

  [Footnote 1: las vírgenes luminosas. _Virgin_ is "one of the titles
  and grades given by the church, by which are distinguished the
  choirs of sainted women who have preserved their integrity and
  purity." _Diccionario Enciclopédico Hispano-Americano_. Compare--

    ... de humildes y penitentes confesores, y de aquel coro-más
    blanco que la nieve, de _vírgenes_ purísimas.

                Rivadeneira.

    ... los estados de los mártires, confesores y _vírgenes_ cantaron
    unos los triunfos de los otros.

                P. Martín de Roa.

  By _luminosas_ is suggested the halo of light that surrounds them,
  proceeding from their own sanctity and represented in the
  stained-glass windows.]

  [Footnote 2: querubines. Read Dante's description of the heavenly
  hierarchy in canto XXVIII of the _Paradiso_. See also p. 47, note
  1.]

  [Footnote 3: Nuestra Señora de Monserrat = 'Our Lady of Montserrat,'
  the Virgin as venerated in the famous monastery of this name. "The
  monastery owes its foundation to the miraculous image of the Virgin,
  the handiwork of Luke the Apostle, which was brought to Barcelona in
  the year of our Lord 50, by St. Peter himself. At the time of the
  Moorish invasion, in 717, the Goths hid it in the hill, where it
  remained until 880, when Some shepherds were attracted to the spot
  by heavenly lightd, etc., whereupon Gondemar Bishop of Vique (guided
  also by a _sweet smell_) found the image in a cave. Accompanied by
  his clergy, the good bishop set out on his return to Manresa
  carrying the holy image with him, but on reaching a certain spot the
  Virgin obstinately refused to proceed farther; thereupon a small
  chapel was built over her, where she remained 160 years. The spot
  where the image first refused to move is still marked by a cross
  with an appropriate inscription.... A chapel where the image now
  rests was founded in 1592, and later opened by Philip II in person."
  Ford, _Handbook for Travellers in Spain_. The monastery is one of
  the most picturesquely situated in all Christendom. It stands high
  up upon the jagged mountain _Mons Serratus_, or Montserrat, which
  gives to the monastery its name. See p. 54, note 2.]

  [Footnote 4: Compare--

    And at that center, with their wings expanded,
      More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,
      Each differing in effolgence and in kind.

    I saw there at their sports and at their songs
      A Beauty[*] smiling, which the gladness was
      Within the eyes of all the other saints;

    And if I had in speaking as much wealth
      As in imagining, I should not dare
      To attempt the smallest part of its delight.

        [Footnote *: The Virgin]

                _Dante's Paradiso, canto XXXI, Longfellow's Translation._]

Mas allá el paraíso de los justos, más allá el trono donde se asienta
la Virgen Maria.[1] El ánimo de Teobaldo se sobrecogió temeroso, y un
hondo pavor se apoderó de su alma. La eterna soledad, el eterno
silencio viven en aquellas regiones, que conducen al misterioso
santuario del Señor. De cuando en cuando azotaba su frente una ráfaga
de aire, frío como la hoja de un puñal, que crispaba sus cabellos de
horror y penetraba hasta la médula de sus huesos; ráfagas semejantes a
las que anunciaban á los profetas la aproximación del espíritu
divino.[2] Al fin llegó á un punto donde creyó percibir un rumor
sordo, que pudiera compararse al zumbido lejano de un enjambre de
abejas, cuando, en las tardes del otoño, revolotean en derredor de las
últimas flores.

  [Footnote 1: Is there confusion here between the Virgin Mary and the
  Virgin of Montserrat, or is the throne her ementioned vacant?]

  [Footnote 2: Compare "And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great
  and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks
  before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the
  wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and
  after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and
  after the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard
  it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood
  in the entering in of the cave." I Kings, xix, part of verses 11-13.
  "And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
  great cloud, and a fire.... And when I saw it, I fell upon my face,
  and I heard a voice of one that spake." Ezekiel, i. 4 and 28.]



VIII


Atravesaba esa fantástica región adonde van todos los acentos de la
tierra, los sonidos que decimos que se desvanecen, las palabras que
juzgamos que se pierden en el aire, los lamentos que creemos que nadie
oye.

Aquí, en un círculo armónico,[1] flotan las plegarias de los niños,
las, oraciones de las vírgenes, los salmos de los piadosos eremitas,
las peticiones de los humildes, las castas palabras de los limpios de
corazón, las resignadas quejas de los que padecen, los ayes de los que
sufren y los himnos de los que esperan. Teobaldo oyó entre aquellas
voces que palpitaban aún en el éter luminoso, la voz de su santa
madre, que pedía á Dios por él; pero no oyó la suya.

  [Footnote 1: círculo armónico = 'melodious circle.' A rhythmic
  circling accompanied by song is characteristic of all of the
  heavenly choirs in Dante's _Paradiso_. Compare--

    Soon as the blessed flame had taken up
      The final word to give it utterance
      Began the holy millstone to revolve,

    And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,
      Before another in a ring enclosed it,
      And motion joined to motion, song to song;

    Song that as greatly doth transcend our muses,
      Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,
      As primal splendor that which is reflected.

                    _canto XII, Longfellow's translation._

    As by a greater gladness urged and drawn
      They who are dancing in a ring sometimes
      Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;

    So, at that orison devout and prompt,
      The holy circles a new joy displayed
      In their revolving and their wondrous Song.

                    _Idem, canto XIV._]



IX


Más allá hirieron sus oídos con un estrépito discordante mil y mil
acentos ásperos y roncos, blasfemias, gritos de venganzas, cantares de
orgias, palabras lúbricas, maldiciones de la desesperación, amenazas
de impotencia y juramentos sacríleges de la impiedad.[1]

  [Footnote 1: This conception of two distinct places in the other
  world to which all good words and all evil words go and echo
  eternally seems to be original with Becquer.]

Teobaldo atravesó el segundo círculo con la rapidez que el meteoro
cruza el cielo en una tarde de verano, por no oir su voz que vibraba
allí sonante y atronadora, sobreponiéndose á las otras voces en media
de aquel concierto infernal.

--_¡ No creo en Dios! ¡ No creo en Dios!_ decia aún su acento
agitándose en aquel océano de blasfemias; y Teobaldo comenzaba á
creer.



X


Dejó atrás aquellas regiones y atravesó otras inmensidades llenas de
visiones terribles, que ni él pudo comprender ni yo acierto á
concebir, y llegó al cabo al último círculo[1] de la espiral de los
cielos, donde los serafines[2] adoran al Señor, cubierto el rostro con
las triples alas[3] y postrados á sus pies.

  [Footnote 1: último circulo. Becquer follows no particular
  metaphysical system in his description of the various heavenly
  spheres.]

  [Footnote 2: serafines. The seraphim ('burning' _or_ 'flaming ones')
  are the highest order in the hierarchy of angels. They are mentioned
  by Isaiah (vi. 2).

Dante speaks of the seraph as "that soul in Heaven which is most
enlightened." _Paradiso_, canto XXI, Charles Eliot Norton's
translation. See p. 47, note 1, and also p. 152, note 1.]

  [Footnote 3: cubierto el rostro con las triples alas. Becquer does
  not follow exactly the Biblical description. "Above it stood the
  seraphim: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face,
  and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly."
  Isaiah vi. 2.

  In the famous vision of St. Francis of Assisi, at the time that he
  received his stigmata, the Seraph appeared to him with two wings
  raised above his head, with two wings stretched out for flight, and
  with two wings covering his whole body. See Mrs. Oliphant, Francis
  _of Assisi_, London, Macmillan & Co., 1871, pp. 253-255.]

Él quiso mirarlo.

Un aliento de fuego abrasó su cara, un mar de luz obscureció sus ojos,
un trueno gigante retumbó en sus oídos, y arrancado del corcel y
lanzado al vacío como la piedra candente que arroja un volcán, se
sintió bajar, y bajar sin caer nunca, ciego, abrasado y ensordecido,
como cayó el ángel rebelde cuando Dios derribó el pedestal de su
orgullo con un soplo de sus labios.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Compare--

    Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared,
    And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
    Through his wild anarchy; so huge a rout
    Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last,
    Yawning, received them whole, and on them closed--
    Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire
    Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
                    Milton, _Paradise Lost_, book vi.]


       *       *       *       *       *



I


La noche había cerrado, y el viento gemía agitando las hojas de los
árboles, por entre cuyas frondosas ramas se deslizabs un suave rayo de
luna, cuando Teobaldo, incorporándose sobre el codo y restregándose
los ojos como si despertara de un profundo sueño, tendió alrededor una
mirada y se encontró en el mismo bosque donde hirió al jabalí, donde
cayó muerto su corcel; donde le dieron aquella fantástica cabalgadura
que le había arrastrado á unas regiones desconocidas y misteriosas.

Un silencio de muerte reinaba á su alrededor; un silencio que sólo
interrumpía el lejano bramido de los ciervos, el temeroso murmullo de
las hojas, y el eco de una campana distante que de vez en cuando traía
el viento en sus ráfagas.

--Habré soñado, dijo el barón: y emprendió su camino al través del
bosque, y salió al fin á la llanura.



II


En lontananza, y sobre las rocas de Montagut, vió destacarse la negra
silueta de su castillo, sobre el fondo azulado y transparente del
cielo de la noche.--Mi castillo está lejos y estoy cansado, murmuró;
esperaré el día en un lugar cercano, y se dirigió al lugar.--Llamo á
la puerta.--¿Quien sois? le preguntaron.--El barón de Fortcastell,
respondió, y se le rieron en sus barbas.--Llamó á otra.--¿Quién sois y
que queréis? tornaron á preguntarle.--Vuestro señor, insistió el
caballero, sorprendido de que no le conociesen; Teobaldo de
Montagut.[1]--¡Teobaldo de Montagut! dijo colérica su interlocutora,
que no era una vieja; ¡Teobaldo de Montagut el del cuento!... ¡Bah!...
Seguid vuestro camino, y no vengáis á sacar de su sueño á las gentes
honradas para decirles chanzonetas insulsas.

  [Footnote 1: Teobaldo de Montagut. See p. 140, note 1.]



III


Teobaldo, lleno de asombro, abandonó la aldea y se dirigió al
castillo, á cuyas puertas llego cuando apenas clareaba el día. El foso
estaba cegado con los sillares de las derruidas almenas; el puente
levadizo, inútil ya, se pudría colgado aún de sus fuertes tirantes de
hierro, cubiertos de orín por la acción de los años; en la torre del
homenaje tañia lentamente una campana; frente al arco principal de la
fortaleza y sobre un pedestal de granito se elevaba una cruz; en los
muros no se veía un solo soldado; y confuso, y sordo, parecía que de
su seno se elevaba como un murmullo lejano, un himno religioso, grave,
solemne y magnifico.

--¡Y este es mi castillo, no hay duda! decía Teobaldo, paseando su
inquieta mirada de un punto á otro, sin acertar á comprender lo que le
pasaba. ¡Aquel es mi escudo, grabado aún sobre la clave del arco! ¡Ese
es el valle de Montagut! Estas tierras que domina, el señorio de
Fortcastell....

En aquel instante las pesadas hojas de la puerta giraron sobre sus
goznes y apareció en su dintel un religioso.



IV


--¿Quién sois y que hacéis aquí? preguntó Teobaldo al monje.

--Yo soy, contestó éste, un humilde servidor de Dios, religioso del
monasterio de Montagut.

--Pero ... interrumpió el barón, Montagut ¿no es un señorío?

--Lo fué, prosiguió el monje ... hace mucho tiempo. ... Á su último
señor, según cuentan, se le llevó el diablo; y como no tenía á nadie
que le sucediese en el feudo, los condes soberanos[1] hicieron
donación de estas tierras á los religiosos de nuestra regla, que están
aquí desde hará cosa de ciento á ciento veinte años. Y vos ¿quién
sois?

  [Footnote 1: condes soberanos. See p. 121, note 1, and p. 123, l.
  22.]

--Yo ... balbuceó el barón de Fortcastell, después de un largo rato de
silencio; yo soy ... un miserable pecador, que arrepentido de sus
faltas, viene á confesarlas á vuestro abad, y 15 á pedirle que le
admita en el seno de su religión.




LAS HOJAS SECAS


El sol se había puesto: las nubes, que cruzaban hechas jirones sobre
mi cabeza, iban á amontonarse unas sobre otras en el horizonte lejano.
El viento frio de las tardes de otoño arremolinaba las hojas secas á
mis pies.

Yo estaba sentado al borde de un camino,[1] por donde siempre vuelven
menos de los que van.

  [Footnote 1: un camino. The road to the cemetery.]

No sé en qué pensaba, si en efecto pensaba entonces en alguna cosa. Mi
alma temblaba á punto de lanzarse al espacio, como el pajáro tiembla y
agita ligeramente las alas antes de levantar el vuelo.

Hay momentos en que, merced á una serie de abstracciones, el espíritu
se sustrae á cuanto le rodea, y replegándose en sí mismo analiza y
comprende todos los misteriosos fenómenos de la vida interna del
hombre.

Hay otros en que se desliga de la carne, pierde su personalidad y se
confunde con los elementos de la naturaleza, se relaciona con su modo
de ser, y traduce su incomprensible lenguaje.

Yo me hallaba en uno de estos últimos momentos, cuando solo y en medio
de la escueta llanura, oí hablar cerca de mí.

Eran dos hojas secas las que hablaban, y éste, poco más ó menos, su
extraño diálogo:

¿De donde vienes, hermana?

--Vengo de rodar con el torbellino, envuelta en la nube del polvo y de
las hojas secas nuestras compañeras, á lo largo de la interminable
llanura. ¿Y tú?

--Yo he seguido algún tiempo la corriente del río, hasta que el
vendaval me arranco de entre el légamo y los juncos de la orilla.

--¿Y adónde vas?

--No lo sé[1]: ¿lo sabe acaso el viento que me empuja?

  [Footnote 1: ¿Y adónde vas?--No lo sé. Compare these well-known
  verses by the French poet Arnault:

    De ta tige détachée,
    Pauvre feuille desséchée,
    Oh vas-tu?--Je n'en sais rien.
    L'orage a brisé le chêne
    Qui seul était mon soutien;
    De son inconstante haleine
    Le zéphyr ou l'aquilon
    Depuis ce jour me promène
    De la forêt a la plaine,
    De la montagne au vallon.
    Je vais oh le vent me mene,
    Sans me plaindre ou m'effrayer;
    Je vais où va toute chose,
    Oh va la fenille de rose
    Et la feuille de laurier.

  ]

--¡Ay! ¿Quién diría que habíamos de acabar 'amarillas y secas
arrastrándonos por la tierra, nosotras que vivimos vestidas de color y
de luz meciendonos en el aire?

--Te acuerdas de los hermosos días en que brotamos; de aquella
apacible mañana en que, roto el hinchado botón que nos servía de cuna,
nos desplegamos al templado beso del sol como un abanico de
esmeraldas?

--¡Oh! ¡Qué dulce era sentirse balanceada por la brisa á aquella
altura, bebiendo por todos los poros el aire y la luz!

--¡Oh! ¡Qué hermoso era ver correr el agua del río que lamía las
retorcidas raíces del añoso tronco que nos sustentaba, aquel agua
limpia y trasparente que copiaba como un espejo el azul del cielo, de
modo que creíamos vivir suspendidas entre dos abismos azules!

--¡Con qué placer nos asomábamos por cima de las verdes frondas para
vernos retratadas en la temblorosa corriente!

--¡Cómo cantábamos juntas imitando el rumor de la brisa y siguiendo el
ritmo de las ondas!

--Los insectos brillantes revoloteaban desplegando sus alas de gasa á
nuestro alrededor.

--Y lás mariposas blancas y las libélulas azules, que giran por el
aire en extraños circulos, se paraban un momento en nuestros
dentellados bordes á contarse los secretes de ese misterioso amor que
dura un instante y les consume la vida.[1]

  [Footnote 1: y les consume la vida. This is strictly true of the
  honey-bee, but not to my knowledge of butterflies or dragon-flies.]

--Cada cual de nosotras era una nota en el concierto de los bosques.

--Cada cual de nosotras era un tono en la armonía de su color.

--En las noches de luna, cuando su plateada luz resbalaba sobre la
cima de los montes, ¿te acuerdas cómo charlábamos en voz baja entre
las diáfanas sombras?

--Y referíamos con un blando susurro las historias de los silfos que
se columpian en los hilos de oro que cuelgan las arañas entre los
árboles.

--Hasta que suspendíamos nuestra monótona charla para oir embebecidas
las quejas del ruiseñor, que había escogido nuestro tronco por
escabel.

--Y eran tan tristes y tan suaves sus lamentos que, aunque lenas de
gozo al oirle,[1] nos amanecia llorando.

  [Footnote 1: oirle. See p. 66, note 1.]

--¡Oh! ¡Qué dulces eran aquellas lágrimas que nos prestaba el rocío de
la noche y que resplandecían con todos los colores del iris á la
primera luz de la aurora!

--Después vino la alegre banda de jilgueros á llenar de vida y de
ruidos el bosque con la alborozada y confusa algarabia de sus cantos.

--Y una enamorada pareja, colgó junto á nosotras su redondo nido de
aristas y de plumas.

--Nosotras servíamos de abrigo á los pequeñuelos contra las molestas
gotas de la lluvia en las tempestades de verano.

--Nosotras les servíamos de dosel y los defendíamos de los importunes
rayos del sol.

--Nuestra vida pasaba como un sueño de oro, del que no sospechábamos
que se podría despertar.

--Una hermosa tarde en que todo parecía sonreir á nuestro alrededor,
en que el sol poniente encendía el ocaso y arrebolaba las nubes, y de
la tierra ligeramente húmeda se levantaban efluvios de vida y perfumes
de flores, dos amantes se detuvieron á la orilla del agua y al pie del
tronco que nos sostenía.

--¡Nunca se borrará ese recuerdo de mi memoria! Ella era joven, casi
una niña, hermosa y pálida. Él le decía con ternura:--¿Por qué
lloras?--Perdona este involuntario sentimiento de egoísmo, le
respondió ella enjugándose una lágrima; lloro por mí. Lloro la vida
que me huye: cuando el cielo se corona de rayos de luz, y la tierra se
viste de verdura y de flores, y el viento trae perfumes y cantos de
pájaros y armonías distantes, y se ama y se siente una amada ¡la vida
es buena!--¿Y por que no has de vivir? insistió él estrechándole las
manos conmovido.--Porque es imposible. Cuando caigan secas--esas hojas
que murmuran armoniosas sobre nuestras cabezas, yo moriré también, y
el viento llevará algún día su polvo y el mío ¿quién sabe adónde?

--Yo lo oí y tú lo oiste, y nos estremecimos y callamos. ¡Debiamos
secarnos! ¡Debiamos morir y girar arrastradas por los remolinos del
viento! Mudas y llenas de terror permanecíamos aún cuando llegó la
noche. ¡Oh! ¡Que noche tan horrible!

--Por la primera vez faltó á su cita el enamorado ruiseñor que la
encantaba con sus quejas.

--Á poco volaron los pájaros, y con ellos sus pequeñuelos ya vestidos
de plumas; y quedo el nido solo, columpiándose lentamente y triste,
como la cuna vacía de un niño muerto.

--Y huyeron las mariposas blancas y las libélulas azules, dejando su
lugar á los insectos obscuros que venían á roer nuestras fibras y á
depositar en nuestro seno sus asquerosas larvas.

--¡Oh! ¡Y cómo nos estremecíamos encogidas al helado contacto de las
escarchas de la noche!

--Perdimos el color y la frescura.

--Perdimos la suavidad y las formas, y lo que antes al tocarnos era
como rumor de besos, como murmullo de palabras de enamorados, luego se
convirtió en áspero ruido, seco, desagradable y triste.

--¡Y al fin volamos desprendidas!

--Hollada bajo el pie de indiferente pasajero, sin cesar arrastrada de
un punto á otro entre el polvo y el fango, me he juzgado dichosa
cuando podía reposar un instante en el profundo surco de un camino.

--Yo he dado vueltas sin cesar arrastrada por la turbia corriente, y
en mi larga peregrinación vi, solo, enlutado y sombrío, contemplando
con una mirada distraída las aguas que pasaban y las hojas secas que
marcaban su movimiento, á uno de los dos amantes cuyas palabras nos
hicieron presentir la muerte.

--¡Ella también se desprendió de la vida y acaso dormirá en una fosa
reciente, sobre la que yo me detuve un momento!

--¡Ay! Ella duerme y reposa al fin; pero nosotras, cuando acabaremos
este large viaje?...

--¡Nunca!...Ya el viento que nos dejó reposar un punto vuelve á
soplar, y ya me siento estremecida para levantarme de la tierra y
seguir con él. ¡Adiós, hermana!

--¡Adiós!...

Silbó el aire que había permanecido un momento callado, y las hojas se
lavantaron en confuso remolino, perdiéndose á 10 lejos entre las
tineblas de la noche.

Y yo pensé entonces algo que no puedo recordar, y que, aunque lo
recordase, no encontraría palabras para decirlo.





RIMAS



I[1]


      Yo sé un himno gigante y extraño
  Que anuncia en la noche del alma una aurora,
  Y estas páginas son de ese himno
  Cadencias que el aire dilata en las sombras.

      Yo quisiera escribirle,[2] del hombre
  Domando el rebelde, mezquino idioma,
  Con palabras que fuesen á un tiempo
  Suspiros y risas, colores y notas.

      Pero en vano es luchar; que no hay cifra
  Capaz de encerrarlo, y apenas ¡oh hermosa!
  Si, teniendo en mis manos las tuyas,
  Pudiera, al oirlo, cantártelo á solas.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is made up of alternate decasyllabic
    anapests and dodecasyllabic amphibrachs, thus:

      -- -- /  | -- -- /  | -- -- /  | --
      -- /  -- | -- /  -- | -- /  -- | -- / --

    The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: escribirle. Le refers to _himno_. See p. 66, note 1.]




IV[1]

    No digáis que agotado su tesoro,
  De asuntos falta,[2] enmudeció la lira:
  Podrá no haber poetas; pero siempre
      Habrá poesía.

  Mientras las ondas de la luz al beso[3]
      Palpiten encendidas;
  Mientras el sol las desgarradas nubes
      De fuego y oro vista;

  Mientras el aire en su regazo lleve
      Perfumes y armonías;
  Mientras haya en el mundo primavera,
      ¡Habrá poesía!

  Mientras la ciencia á descubrir no alcance
      Las fuentes de la vida,
  Y en el mar ó en el cielo haya un abismo
      Que al cálculo resista;[4]
  Mientras la humanidad siempre avanzando
      No sepa á do camina;[5]
  Mientras haya un misterio para el hombre,
      ¡Habrá poesía!

  Mientras sintamos que se alegra el alma,
      Sin que los labios rían;
  Mientras se llore sin que el llanto acuda
      Á nublar la pupila;

  Mientras el corazón y la cabeza[6]
    Batallando prosigan;
  Mientras haya esperanzas y recuerdos,
    ¡Habrá poesía!

  Mientras haya unos ojos que reflejen
      Los ojos que los miran;
  Mientras responda el labio suspirando
      Al labio que suspira;
  Mientras sentirse puedan en un beso
      Dos almas confundidas;
  Mientras exista una mujer hermosa,
      ¡Habrá poesía!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic and
    heptasyllabic verses, with a pentasyllabic refrain. The
    hendecasyllabic verses are partly of the first and partly of the
    second class (see Introduction), while the heptasyllabic verses
    have the required accent on the sixth syllable, with at least one
    minor variable accent, and the pentasyllabic verses on the fourth,
    according to rule. The even verses have the same assonance
    throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: De asuntos falta = 'through (_or_ for) lack of
    subjects.' Prose order--_falta de asuntos_.]

    [Footnote 3: de la luz al beso. Prose order--al beso de la luz.]

    [Footnote 4: Mientras... resista. Man's inability to solve these
    sovereign problems is nowhere more poetically expressed than in
    Edward Fitzgerald's translation of Omar Khayyam's _Rubáiyát._
    Compare--

            (XXVII)
      Myself when young did eagerly frequent
      Doctor and Saint, and heard great argument
      About it and about: but evermore,
      Came out by the same door where in I went.

            (XXXI)
      Up from Earth's Center through the Seventh Gate
      I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,
      And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;
      But not the Master-knot of Human Fate.

    ]

    [Footnote 5: No sepa á do camina. This doubt seems to assail
    frequently the mind of Becquer, as it does that of the old Persian
    poet Omar Khayyam:

            (XXIX)
      Into this Universe, and _Why_ not knowing
      Nor _Whence_, like water willy-nilly flowing;
      And out of it, as Wind along the Waste
      I know not _Whither_, willy-nilly blowing.

            (LXIV)
      Strange, is it not? that of the myriads who
      Before us pass'd the door of Darkness through,
      Not one returns to tell us of the Road,
      Which to discover we must travel too.

    _Rubáiyát--Edward Fitzgerald's translation._]

    [Footnote 6: el corazón y la cabeza. Compare--

      It is the heart, and not the brain,
      That to the highest doth attain.

    Longfellow, _The Building of the Ship._]




VII[1]


    Del salón en el ángulo obscuro,
  De su dueño tal vez olvidada,
  Silenciosa y cubierta de polvo
      Veíase el arpa.

    ¡Cuánta nota dormía en sus cuerdas,
  Como el pájaro duerme en las ramas,
  Esperando la mano de nieve
      Que sabe arrancarlas![2]

    ¡Ay! pensé; ¡cuántas veces el genio
  Así duerme en el fondo del alma,
  Y una voz, como Lázaro,[3] espera
      Que le diga: «Levántate y anda!»

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of decasyllabic anapests and of
    hexasyllabic amphibrachs, thus:

      -- -- / | -- -- / | -- -- / | --
      -- / -- | -- / --

    The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: For this idea, compare--

      Je suis dans un salon comme une mandoline
      Oubliée en passant sur le bord d'un coussin.
      Elle renferme en elle une langue divine,
      Mais si son mattre dort, tout reste dans son sein.

    Alfred de Musset, _A quoi rêvent les jeunes filles_, Act 1, SC.
    iv.]

    [Footnote 3: Lázaro = 'Lazarus.' See Gospel by St. John, chapter
    II. Read Stephen Phillips' beautiful poem entitled "Lazarus," pp.
    45-47 of his _Poems_, published by John Lane, London, 1901.]




IX[1]


    Besa el aura que gime blandamente
  Las leves ondas que jugando riza;
  El sol besa á la nube en occidente
  Y de púrpura y oro la matiza;
  La llama en derredor del tronco ardiente
  Por besar á otra llama se desliza,
  Y hasta el sáuce, inclinándose á su peso,
  Al río, que le besa, vuelve un beso.

    [Footnote 1: This poem, of the form called Octava _real_, with the
    regular rhyme scheme _a b a b a b c c_, is composed of
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, save the 2d, which is
    of the second class.]




X[1]


    Los invisibles átomos del aire
  En derredor palpitan y se inflaman;
  El cielo se deshace en rayos de oro;
  La tierra se estremece alborozada;
  Oigo flotando en olas de armonía
  Rumor de besos y batir de alas;
  Mis párpados se cierran... ¿Qué sucede?
  --!Es el amor que pasa![2]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is an _Octava_ composed, with the exception
    of the concluding heptasyllabic verse, of hendecasyllabic verses,
    all of which are of the first class, save the 6th, which is of the
    second class. Note the hiatus in the 6th verse. The even verses
    have the same assonance.]

    [Footnote 2: Note Mrs. Ward's translation (_Macmillan's Mag._,
    Feb., 1883, p. 316).

      The viewless atoms of the air
      Around me palpitate and burn,
      All heaven dissolves in gold, and earth
          Quivers with new-found joy.
      Floating on waves of harmony I hear
      A stir of kisses, and a sweep of wings;
      Mine eyelids close--"What pageant nears?"
          "'Tis Love that passes by!"

    ]




XIII[1]


    Tu pupila es azul, y cuando ríes,
  Su claridad suave me recuerda
  El trémulo fulgor de la mañana
      Que en el mar se refleja.

    _Tu pupila es azul; y cuando lloras,
  Las trasparentes lágrimas en ella
  Se me figuran gotas de rocío
      Sobre una violeta._

    Tu pupila es azul, y si en su fondo
  Como un punto de luz radia una idea,[2]
  Me parece en el cielo de la tarde
      ¡Una perdida estrella!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of three
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, followed by a
    heptasyllabic verse. The even verses of the poem have the same
    assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: radia una idea = 'there gleams some fancy.']




XIV[1]


    Te ví un punto,[2] y, flotando ante mis ojos
  La imagen de tus ojos se quedó,
  Como la mancha obscura, orlada en fuego,
  Que flota y ciega, si se mira al sol.

    Adonde quiera que la vista fijo,
  Torno á ver sus pupilas llamear,
  Mas no te encuentro á tí; que es tu mirada:
  Unos ojos, los tuyos, nada más.

    De mi alcoba en el ángulo los miro
  Desasidos fantásticos lucir:[3]
  Cuando duermo los siento que se ciernen
  De par en par abiertos sobre mí.

    Yo sé que hay fuegos fátuos que en la noche
  Llevan al caminante á perecer:
  Yo me siento arrastrado por tus ojos,
  Pero adónde me arrastran, no lo sé.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed chiefly of hendecasyllabic
    verses of the first class. The even verses of each stanza are
    _agudos_ and assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: un punto = 'but a moment.']

    [Footnote 3: los miro desasidos fantásticos lucir = 'I watch them
    shine like orbs fantastic.' Mrs. Ward translates this stanza as
    follows:

      In my room's furthest corner I behold
      Their strange fantastic blaze,
      And when I sleep I feel them watch
      Unmoved and open o'er my head.

    See Macmillan's Magazine, February, 1883, P--317.]




XV[1]


    Cendal flotante de leve bruma,
  Rizada cinta de blanca espuma,
      Rumor sonoro
      De arpa de oro,
  Beso del aura, onda de luz,
      Éso eres tú.

    Tú, sombra aérea que, cuantas veces
  Voy á tocarte, te desvaneces
  Como la llama, como el sonido,
  Como la niebla, como el gemido
      Del lago azul.

    En mar sin playas onda sonante,
  En el vacio cometa errante,
        Largo lamento
        Del ronco viento,
  Ansia perpetua de algo mejor,
        Eso soy yo.

    ¡Yo, que á tus ojos en mi agonía
  Los ojos vuelvo de noche y día;
  Yo, que incansable corro y demente
  Tras una sombra, tras la hija ardiente
      De una visión!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of decasyllabic and of
    pentasyllable verses. The last two verses of the lst and 3d
    stanzas and the last verse of the 2d and 4th stanzas are agudos,
    the other verses being _llanos_. The rhyme scheme is _a, a, b, b,
    c, c, d, d, e, e, c_ for each half of the poem. Notice the hiatus
    in the 4th and 5th verses.




XVI[1]


    Si al mecer las azules campanillas
        De tu balcón,
  Crees que suspirando pasa el viento
        Murmurador,
  Sabe que, oculto entre las verdes hojas,
        Suspiro yo.

    Si al resonar confuso á tus espaldas
        Vago rumor,
  Crees que por tu nombre te ha llamado
        Lejana voz,
  Sabe que, entre las sombras que te cercan,
        Te llamo yo.

    Si se turba medroso en la alta noche
        Tu corazón,
  Al sentir en tus labios un aliento
        Abrasador,
  Sabe que, aunque invisible, al lado tuyo
        Respire yo.

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with pentasyllable verses alternating. These latter
    are _agudos_ and have the same assonance throughout.]



XXI[1]


    ¿Qué es poesía? dices mientras clavas
  En mi pupila tu pupila azul;
    ¿Qué es poesía? ¿Y tú me lo preguntas?
        Poesía ... eres tú.[2]

    [Footnote 1: We have here three hendecasyllabic verses of both
    classes, followed by a heptasyllabic. Notice the hiatus in the
    1st, 3d, and 4th verses. The 2d and 4th are _agudos_ and
    assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: This thought is developed in the first of Becquer's
    _Cartas literarias á una mujer._]




XXIII[1]


    Por una mirada, un mundo;
  Por una sonrisa, un cielo;
  Por un beso... ¡yo no sé
  Qué te diera por un beso!

    [Footnote 1: Of these four octosyllabic verses the 2d and 4th are
    assonanced.]




XXVII[1]


    Despierta, tiemblo al mirarte;
      Dormida me atrevo á verte;
  Por eso, alma de mi alma,
      Yo velo mientras tú duermes.

    Despierta, ríes; y al reir, tus labios
      Inquietos me parecen
  Relámpagos de grana que serpean
      Sobre un cielo de nieve.

    Dormida,[2] los extremos de tu boca
      Pliega sonrisa leve,[3]
  Suave como el rastro luminoso
      Que deja un sol que muere...
      --¡Duerme!

    Despierta, miras, y al mirar, tus ojos
      Húmedos resplandecen
  Como la onda azul, en cuya cresta
      Chispeando el sol hiere.

    Al través de tus parpados, dormida,
      Tranquilo fulgor viertes,
  Cual derrama de luz templado rayo
      Lámpara transparente[4] ...
    --¡Duerme!

    Despierta, hablas, y al hablar, vibrantes
      Tus palabras parecen
  Lluvia de perlas que en dorada copa
      Se derrama á torrentes?[5]

    Dormida, en el murmullo de tu aliento
      Acompasado y tenue,
  Escucho yo un poema, que mi alma
      Enamorada entiende ...
      --¡Duerme!

    Sobre el corazòn la mano
  Me he puesto, porque no suene
  Su latido, y de la noche
  Turbe la calma solemne.

    De tu balcòn las persianas
  Cerré ya, porque no entre
  El resplandor enojoso
  De la aurora, y te despierte ...
    --¡Duerme!

    [Footnote 1: The 1st, 8th, and 9th stanzas of this poem are in
    octosyllabic verses, and the rest in hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with heptasyllabic verses alternating. A refrain of
    dissyllabic verse begins at the close of the 3d stanza and recurs
    after that regularly at the close of every other stanza. The even
    verses of each stanza have the same assonance throughout, as does
    the refrain. Notice the hiatus in the 3d verse of the 4th stanza
    and in the 1st verse of the 6th stanza.]

    [Footnote 2: Dormida. All of the texts that have been consulted
    read Despierta, but the contrast throughout the poem between the
    two ideas seems to warrant the reading given here, and Mrs. Ward
    in her translation of the poem (see _Macmillan's Mag._, Feb.,
    1883, p. 317) so renders it:

      _Asleep_, the corners of thy mouth
      A light smile upcurls,
      Sweet as the luminous trail
      Left by the dying sun--
      Sleep!

    ]

    [Footnote 3: los ... leve. Prose order--_(una) leve sonrisa pliega
    los extremos..._]

    [Footnote 4: Cual... transparente. Prose order--_Cual_ (una)
    _lámpara transparente derrama (un) templado rayo de luz._]

    [Footnote 5: Notice Mrs. Ward's translation of this stanza:

      Awake thou speak'st, and as thou speak'st, thy words
        Vibrating seem
      A rain of pearls that in a golden cup
        Plashes in torrents.

    See _Macmillan's Magazine_, February, 1883, p. 317.]




XXIX[1]


    Sobre la falda tenía
      El libro abierto;
  En mi mejilla tocaban
      Sus rizos negros;
  No veíamos las letras
      Ninguno, creo;
  Mas guardábamos entrambos
      Hondo silencio.
  ¿Cuanto duro? Ni aún entonces
      Pude saberlo;
  Sólo sé que no se oía
      Más que el aliento,
  Que apresurado escapaba
      Del labio seco.
  Sólo sé que nos volvimos
      Los dos á un tiempo,
  Y nuestros ojos se hallaron,
      Y sonó un beso.

       *       *       *

    Creació de Dante era el libro,
      Era su _Infierno_.[2]
  Cuando á él bajamos los ojos,
      Yo dije trémulo:
  --¿Comprendes ya que un poema
      Cabe en un verso?[3]
    Y ella respondió encendida:
          --¡Ya lo comprendo!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of alternating octosyllabic and
    pentasyllabic verses, the latter having the same assonance
    throughout. Notice that the 5th verse from the end is _a verso
    esdrújulo_.]

    [Footnote 2: The most celebrated work of this world-famous poet
    (1265-1321) is the _Divina Commedia_ which is divided into three
    parts,--_Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso_. In the first of these, in
    Canto v, occurs the episode of Paolo and Francesca da Rimini,
    which is imitated in this poem. See p. 124, note 1.]

    [Footnote 3: Comprendes ... en un verso? The meaning of this
    phrase becomes clear when we compare it with the Italian original.

      _Quel giorno più non vi leggemmo avante._
      That day we read in it no farther.

    ]




XXX[1]


    Asomaba á sus ojos una lágrima
  Y á mi labio una frase de perdón;
  Habló el orgullo y se enjugó su llanto,
  Y la frase en mis labios expiró.

    Yo voy por un camino, ella por otro;
  Pero al pensar en nuestro mutuo amor,
  Yo digo aún: ¿Por qué callé aquel día?
  Y ella dirá: ¿por qué no lloré yo?

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes. The even verses are _agudos_ and have the same
    assonance throughout. Note the _esdrújulo_ ending the lst verse.
    The thought of the poem is very similar to that of Heine's _Wann
    zwei van einander scheiden:_

      Often when two are parting,
      Each grasps a hand as friend;
      And then begins a weeping
      And a sighing without end.

      We did not sigh when parting;
      No tears between us fell;
      The weeping and the sighing
      Came after our farewell.

    _Lyrical Intermezzo, No. 55, translated by Chas. G. Leland._]





XXXI[1]


    Nuestra pasión fué un trágico sainete
  En cuya absurda fábula
  Lo cómico y lo grave confundidos
  Risas y llanto arrancan.

    ¡Pero fué lo peor de aquella historia
      Que al fin de la jornada,
  Á ella tocaron lágrimas y risas,
      Y á mí sólo las lágrimas!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    the first class alternating with regular heptasyllabic verses.
    Notice the _esdrújulos_ terminating the 2d and 8th verses. The
    even verses have the same assonance throughout.]




XXXIII[1]


    Es cuestión de palabras, y no obstante
      Ni tú ni yo jamás,
  Después de lo pasado, convendremos
      En quién la culpa está.

    ¡Lástima que el amor un diccionario
      No tenga donde hallar
  Cuándo el orgullo es simplemente orgullo,
      Y cuándo es dignidad!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes alternating with regular heptasyllabic verses, which
    latter are _agudos_ and have the same assonance throughout.]




XXXVII[1]


    ¡Antes que tú me moriré: escondido
      En las entrañas ya
  El hierro llevo con que abrió tu mano
      La ancha herida mortal!

    Antes que tú me moriré: y mi espíritu
      En su empeño tenaz,
  Sentándose á las puertas de la muerte,
      Allí te esperara.

    Con las horas los días, con los días
      Los años volarán,
  Y á aquella puerta llamarás al cabo...
      ¿Quién deja de llamar?

    Entonces, que tu culpa y tus despojos
      La tierra guardará
  Lavándote en las ondas de la muerte
      Como en otro Jordán;[2]

    Allí, donde el murmullo de la vida
      Temblando á morir va,
  Como la ola que á la playa viene
      Silenciosa á expirar;

    Allí, donde el sepulcro que se cierra
      Abre una eternidad...
  Todo cuanto los dos hemos callado
      ¡Lo tenemos[3] que hablar!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, alternating with regular heptasyllabic _versos
    agudos_, which latter have the same assonance throughout. Notice
    the _esdrújulo_ terminating the 5th verse, and the hiatus in the
    19th verse.]

    [Footnote 2: Jordán. The principal river of Palestine. The idea of
    cleansing by "washing in Jordan" comes originally from the account
    of Elisha's cure of Naaman as related in II Kings v. 10; but that
    of spiritual purification, from the New Testament account of the
    use made of the waters of Jordan by John the Baptist.]

    [Footnote 3: tenemos. The present tense is used here in the sense
    of the future.]




XXXVIII[1]


    Los suspires son aire, y van al aire.
  Las lágrimas son agua, y van al mar.
  Dime, mujer: cuando el amor se olvida,
      ¿Sabes tú á dónde va?

    [Footnote 1: The first two verses of this poem are hendecasyllabic
    of the first class, the 3d is a hendecasyllabic of the second
    class, and the closing verse is heptasyllabic. The even verses are
    _agudos_ and assonanced.]




XXXIX[1]


    ¿Á que me lo decís? lo sé: es mudable,
  Es altanera y vana y caprichosa;
  Antes que el sentimiento de su alma,
  Brotará el agua de la estéril roca.

    Sé que en su corazón, nido de sierpes,
  No hay una fibra que al amor responda;
  Que es una estatua inanimada... pero...
        ¡Es tan hermosa!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a closing pentasyllabic verse. The even verses
    have the same assonance throughout.]





XL[1]


    Su mano entre mis manos,
  Sus ojos en mis ojos,
  La amorosa cabeza
  Apoyada en mi hombro,
  ¡Dios sabe cuántas veces
  Con paso perezoso,
  Hemos vagado juntos
  Bajo los altos olmos,
  Que de su casa prestan
  Misterio y sombra al pórtico!
  Y ayer... un año apenas
  Pasado como un soplo,
  ¡Con qué exquisita gracia,
  Con qué admirable aplomo,
  Me dijo, al presentarnos
  Un amigo oficioso:
  «--Creo que en alguna parte
  He visto á usted.--» ¡Ah! bobos,
  Que sois de los salones
  Comadres de buen tono,
  Y andáis por allí á caza
  De galantes embrollos;
  ¡Que historia habéis perdido!
  ¡Que manjar tan sabroso
  Para ser devorado
  _Sotto voce_[2] en un corro,
  Detras del abanico
  De plumas y de oro!

       *       *       *

  ¡Discreta y casta luna,
  Copudos y altos olmos,
  Paredes de su casa,
  Umbrales de su pórtico,
  Callad, y que el secreto
  No saiga de vosotros!
  Callad, que por mi parte
  Lo he olvidado todo:
  Y ella ... ella ... ¡no hay máscara
  Semejante á su rostro!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed entirely of heptasyllabic
    verses. Notice the _esdrújulos_ ending the 10th, 32d, and 37th
    verses. The even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: Sotto voce: An Italian expression meaning 'in an
    undertone'. Translate here 'mid whispers'.]




XLII[1]


    Cuando me lo contaron sentí el frio
  De una hoja de acero en las entrañas,
  Me apoyé contra el muro, y un instante
  La conciencia perdí de donde estaba.
    Cayó sobre mi espíritu la noche;
  En ira y en piedad se anego el alma...
  ¡Y entonces comprendí por qué se llora,
  Y entonces comprendí por qué se mata![2]
    Pasó la nube de dolor... con pena
  Logré balbucear breves, palabras...
  ¿Quién me dió la noticia?... Un fiel amigo...
  ¡Me hací un gran favor!... Le dí las gracias.


    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed entirely of hendecasyllabic
    verses, of both classes. The even verses have the same assonance
    throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: Compare Alfred de Mussel's description of a similar
    experience of his own, after his rupture with George Sand, which
    occurred in Venice in 1834 during the Italian journey.

      Lamartine, c'est la, dans cette rue obscure,
      Assis sur une borne, au fond d'un carrefour,
      Les deux mains sur mon coeur, et serrant ma blessure,
      Et sentant y saigner un invincible amour;
      C'est là, dans cette nuit d'horreur et de detresse,
      Au milieu des transports d'un peuple furieux
      Qui semblait en passant crier à ma jeunesse:
      "Toi qui pleures ce soir, n'as-ta pas ri comme eux?"
      C'est là, devant ce mur, où j'ai frappe ma tete,
      Où j'ai posé deux fois le fer sur mon sein nu;
      C'est là, le croiras-tu? chaste et noble poète,
      Que de tes chants divins je me suis souvenu.

                      _Lettre à Lamartine_.]




XLIII[1]


    Dejé la luz á un lado, y en el borde
  De la revuelta cama me senté,
  Mudo, sombrío, la pupila inmóvil
        Clavada en la pared.

    ¿Qué tiempo estuve así­? No sé: al dejarme
  La embrïaguez horrible del dolor,
  Expiraba la luz, y en mis balcones
        Reia el sol.

    Ni sé tampoco en tan terribles horas
  En qué pensaba ó qué pasó por mí;
  Sólo recuerdo que lloré y maldije,
  Y que en aquella noche envejecí.[2]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a heptasyllabic verse closing the first stanza,
    and a pentasyllable verse closing the second stanza. The even
    verses of each Stanza are _agudos_ and assonanced.]

    [Footnote 2: This poem may have been inspired by the following
    lines of Alfred de Musset, describing his experience in Venice.
    See p. 181, note 1.

      Elle ne venait pas. Seul, la tête baissée,
      Je regardai longtemps les murs et le chemin,--
      Et je ne t'ai pas dit quelle ardeur insensée
      Cette inconstante femme allumait dans mon sein;
      Je n'aimais qu'elle au monde, et vivre un jour sans elle
      Me semblait un destin plus affreux que la mort.
      Je me souviens pourtant qu'en cette nuit cruelle
      Pour briser mon lien je fis un long effort.
           *       *       *       *       *       *
      Le jour parut enfin. Las d'une vaine attente,
      Sur le bord du balcon je m'etais assoupi;
      Je rouvris la paupière Ã  l'aurore naissante,
      Et je laissai flotter mon regard ébloui.

                      _La Nuit d'Octobre._]





XLIX[1]


  Alguna vez la encuentro por el mundo
      Y pasa junto á mí:
  Y pasa sonriéndose, y yo digo:
      ¿Cómo puede reír?

  Luego asomo á mi labio otra sonrisa,
      Máscara del dolor,
  Y entonces pienso:--¡Acaso ella se ríe
      Como me río yo!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    the first class, alternating with assonanced heptasyllabic
    _versos_ agudos.]





LII[1]


    Olas gigantes que os rompéis bramando
  En las playas desiertas y remotas,
  Envuelto entre la sábana de espumas,
      ¡Llevadme con vosotras!

    Ráfagas de huracán, que arrebatáis
  Del alto bosque las marchitas hojas,
  Arrastrado en el ciego torbellino,
      ¡Llevadme con vosotras!

    Nubes de tempestad, que[2] rompe el rayo
  Y en fuego ornáis las desprendidas orlas,
  Arrebatado entre la niebla obscura,
      ¡Llevadme con vosotras!

    Llevadme, por piedad, adonde el vértigo
  Con[3] la razón me arranque la memoria...
  ¡Por piedad!... ¡Tengo miedo de quedarme
      Con mi dolor á solas!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses of
    both classes, with a heptasyllabic verse closing each stanza.
    Notice the _esdrújuto_ terminating the 13th verse. All even verses
    have the same assonance.]

    [Footnote 2: que rompe el rayo y ... ornáis. Comparep. 10, note
    1, and p. 29, note 3.]

    [Footnote 3: Con = 'along with.']





LIII[1]


    Volverán las obscuras golondrinas
  En tu balcón sus nidos á colgar,
  Y, otra vez, con el ala á sus cristales
      Jugando llamarán.

    Pero aquellas que el vuelo refrenaban
  Tu hermosura y mi dicha á contemplar,
  Aquellas que aprendieron nuestros nombres...
      Esas... ¡no volverán!

    Volverán las tupidas madreselvas
  De tu jardí­n las tapias á escalar,
  Y otra vez á la tarde, aun más hermosas,
      Sus flores se abrirán;

    Pero aquellas, cuajadas de rocío,
  Cuyas gotas mirábamos temblar
  Y caer, como lágrimas del día...
      Esas... ¡no volverán!

    Volverán del amor en tus oídos
  Las palabras ardientes á sonar;[2]
  Tu corazón de su profundo sueño
      Tal vez despertará;

    Pero mudo y absorto y de rodillas,
  Como se adora á Dios ante su altar,
  Como yo te he querido... desengáñate,
      Asi no te querrán![3]

    [Footnote 1: This is the most beautiful and the best known of
    Becquer's poems, and has often been set to music. It is composed
    of hendecasyllabic verses, mostly of the first class, with a
    heptasyllabic verse closing each stanza. Notice the _esdrújulo_
    terminating the next to the last verse. The even verses are agudos
    and of the same assonance throughout, with the alternate ones
    rhyming.]

    [Footnote 2: Volverán ... á sonar. Prose order--_Las ardientes
    palabras del amor volverán á sonar en tus oidos_.]

    [Footnote 3: "With this passionate and melancholy poem, full in
    the Spanish of cadences which cling to the memory, the love-story
    proper seems to come to an end. The remaining poems are all so
    many cries of melancholy and despair, without, however, any
    special reference to the treacherous mistress of the earlier
    series." Mrs. Ward, _A Spanish Romanticist_, Macmillan's Magazine,
    February, 1883, p. 319.]





LXVI[1]


    ¿De donde vengo?... El más horrible y áspero
        De los senderos busca;
  Las huellas de unos pies ensangrentados
        Sobre la roca dura;
  Los despojos de un alma hecha jirones
        En las zarzas agudas;
        Te dirán el camino
        Que conduce á mi cuna.[2]

    ¿Adónde voy? El más sombrio y triste
        De los páramos cruza;
  Valle de eternas nieves y de eternas
        Melancólicas brumas.
  En donde esté una piedra solitaria
        Sin inscriptión alguna,
        Donde habite el olvido,
        Allí estará mi tumba?[3]

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hendecasyllabic verses,
    mostly of the first class, and of heptasyllabic verses. Notice the
    _esdrújulo_ ending the 1st verse. The even verses have the same
    assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: "Read in the light of what we know of his long
    struggle, his frail physical health, his sensitive temper, his
    crushing double defeat at the hands of death, these somber verses
    have an individual, personal note, hardly present, perhaps, in the
    love-poems, with all their passionate beauty." Mrs. Ward, _A
    Spanish Romanticist_, Macmillan Magazine, February, 1883, p, 319.]

    [Footnote 3: "He used to dream, he tells us, in his boyish
    visions, of a marble tomb by the Guadalquivir, of which his
    fellow-townsmen should probably say as they pointed it out to
    strangers, 'Here sleeps the poet!' In his later days, oppressed
    with drudgery and ill-health, as he looked towards the future he
    bitterly saw himself forgotten, and oblivion settling down on all
    his half-finished activities of heart and brain." (Mrs. Ward,
    _ib_, p. 320.) It was in such a mood that he wrote this the most
    painful of all his poems.]





LXVIII[1]


      No sé lo que he soñado
      En la noche pasada;
  Triste, muy triste debió ser el sueño,
  Pues despierto la angustia me duraba.

      Noté, al incorporarme,
      Húmeda la almohada,
  Y por primera vez sentí, al notarlo,
  De un amargo placer henchirse el alma.

      Triste cosa es el sueño
      Que llanto nos arranca;
  Mas tengo en mi tristeza una alegría...
  ¡Sé que aún me quedan lágrimas!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of two
    heptasyllabic verses followed (except in the case of the third
    stanza which ends in a heptasyllabic verse) by two hendecasyllabic
    verses. The even verses have the same assonance throughout. Notice
    the _esdrújulo_ ending the poem.

    The thought in the poem recalls that of Heine's _Ich hab' im Traum
    geweinet_. Becquer's verses are less musical, but the sentiment
    expressed by them is less artificial, and gives evidence of more
    real bitterness of heart.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou didst buried lie;
      I woke, and with my weeping
        My cheeks were not yet dry.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou hadst gone from me;
      I woke, and still kept weeping
        Full long and bitterly.

      I wept while I was dreaming
        That thou didst love me well;
      I woke, and--woe is me, love--
        My tears are flowing still.

    _Lyrical Intermezzo, no. 59, translated by Chas. G. Leland._]





LXIX[1]



    Al brillar un relámpago[2] nacemos,
  Y aún dura su fulgor, cuando morimos:
      ¡Tan corto es el vivir![3]
    La gloria y el amor tras que corremos,
  Sombras de un sueno son que perseguimos:
      ¡Despertar es morir!

    [Footnote 1: Each stanza of this poem is composed of two
    hendecasyllabic verses of the first class, followed by a
    heptasyllabic _verso agudo_. The rhyme scheme of the poem is a, b,
    c, a, b, c.]

    [Footnote 2: Al brillar un relampago = 'At a lightning's flash';
    that is to say, at the first gleam from a flash of lightning.

    [Footnote 3: Tan corto es el vivir. The brevity of human life is
    naturally enough a favorite theme with poets. Compare--

      A Moment's Halt--a momentary taste
      Of BEING from the Well amid the Waste--
      And Lo!--the phantom Caravan has reached
      The NOTHING it set out from--
          Oh, make haste!

    _The Rubáiyát of Omay Khayyám, 48th quatrain, Edward Fitzgerald's
    translation._]




LXXIII[1]


    Cerraron sus ojos
  Que aún tenía abiertos;
  Taparon su cara
  Con un blanco lienzo:
  Y unos sollozando,
  Otros en silencio,
  De la triste alcoba
  Todos se salieron.

    La luz, que en un vaso,
  Ardía en el suelo,
  Al muro arrojaba
  La sombra del lecho;
  Y entre aquella sombra
  Veíase á intervales,
  Dibujarse rígida
  La forma del cuerpo.

    Despertaba el día,
  Y á su albor primero
  Con sus mil ruidos
  Despertaba el pueblo.
  Ante aquel contraste
  De vida y misterios,
  De luz y tinieblas,
  Medité un momento:
  «_¡Dios mio, qué solos
  se quedan los muertos!!_»

    De la casa en hombros
  Lleváronla al templo,
  Y en una capilla
  Dejaron el féretro.
  Allí rodearon
  Sus pálidos restos
  De amarillas velas
  Y de paños negros.[2]

    Al dar de las ánimas[3]
  El toque postrero,
  Acabó una vieja
  Sus últimos rezos;
  Cruzó la ancha nave,
  Las puertas gimieron,
  Y el santo recinto
  Quedóse desierto;

    De un reloj se oía
  Compasado el péndulo,
  Y de algunos cirios
  El chisporroteo.
  Tan medroso y triste,
  Tan obscuro y yerto,
  Todo se encontraba...
  Que pensé un momento:
  «_¡Dios mio, qué solos
  se quedan los muertos!!_»

    De la alta campana
  La lengua de hierro,
  Le dió, volteando,
  Su adiós lastimero.
  El luto en las ropas,
  Amigos y deudos
  Cruzaron en fila,
  Formando el cortejo.

    Del último asilo,
  Obscure y estrecho,
  Abrió la piqueta
  El nicho á un extremo.[4]
  Allí la acostaron,
  Tapiáronle luego,
  Y con un saludo
  Despidióse el duelo.

    La piqueta al hombro,
  El sepulturero
  Cantando entre dientes
  Se perdió á lo lejos.
  La noche se entraba,
  Reinaba el silencio;
  Perdido en las sombras,
  Medite un memento:
  «_¡Dios mío, qué solos
  se quedan los muertos?!_»

    En las largas noches
  Del helado invierno,
  Cuando las maderas
  Crujir hace el viento
  Y azota los vidrios
  El fuerte aguacero,
  De la pobre niña
  Á solas me acuerdo.

    Allí cae la lluvia
  Con un sòn eterno;
  Allí la combate
  El soplo del cierzo.
  Del húmedo muro
  Tendida en el hueco,
  Acaso de frío
  Se hielan sus huesos!...

       *       *       *

    ¿Vuelve el polvo al polvo?
  ¿Vuela el alma al cielo?
  ¿Todo es vil materia,
  Podredumbre y cieno?
  ¡No sé;[5] pero hay algo
  Que explicar no puedo
  Que al par nos infunde
  Repugnancia y duelo,
  Al dejar tan tristes,
  Tan solos los muertos!

    [Footnote 1: This poem is composed of hexasyllabic verses. Notice
    the _esdrújulos_ terminating lines 14, 15, 30, 35, and 44. The
    even verses have the same assonance throughout.]

    [Footnote 2: De la casa ... panes negros. "The following are the
    chief points in the funeral rite as prescribed in the Roman
    Ritual. The corpse is borne in procession with lights to the
    church. The parish priest assists in surplice and black stole; the
    clerks carry the holy water and cross; the coffin is first
    sprinkled with holy water and the psalm _De Profundis_ recited;
    then the corpse is carried to the church while the Miserere is
    said.... Candles are lighted round the coffin, and the office and
    Mass of the dead, followed by absolution, accompanied by aspersion
    and incensation over the corpse, are said. Then another
    procession, and the corpse is carried to the tomb." Addis and
    Arnold, _Catholic Dict._, p. 361.

    [Footnote 3: las ánimas. The ringing of bells to remind the
    faithful to pray for the souls of the dead.]

    [Footnote 4: El nicho á un extremo. To understand this passage one
    must bear in mind that in Spanish graveyards corpses are generally
    interred in niches superimposed one above the other in high walls,
    like the pigeon-holes of a cabinet, and that these niches are
    sealed with stone tablets bearing the names etc. of the deceased.]

    [Footnote 5: No sé. See p. 166, note 1.]





LXXV[1]



    ¿Será verdad que cuando toca el sueño
  Con sus dedos de rosa nuestros ojos
  De la cárcel que habita huye el espíritu
      En vuelo presuroso?[2]

    ¿Será verdad que, huésped de las nieblas,
  De la brisa nocturna al tenue soplo,[3]
  Alado sube à la región vacía[4]
        Á encontrarse con otros?

    ¿Y allí, desnudo de la humana forma,
  Allí, los lazos terrenales rotos,
  Breves horas habita de la idea
        El mundo silencioso?

    ¿Y ríe y llora y aborrece y ama,
  Y guarda un rastro del dolor y el gozo,
  Semejante al que deja cuando cruza
        El cielo un meteoro?

    ¡Yo no sé si ese mundo de visiones
  Vive fuera, ó va dentro de nosotros;[5]
  Pero sé que conozco à muchas gentes
      Á quienes no conozco![6]

    [Footnote 1: Each Stanza of this poem is composed of three
    hendecasyllabic verses followed by a heptasyllabic. Notice the
    _esdrújulo_ ending the 3d verse and the hiatus in the 5th verse.
    The even verses are of the same assonance throughout.

    [Footnote 2: cuando toca ... presaroso. Cicero says, in _De
    Divinatione_, I. 30. 63: _Jacet enim corpus dormientis ui mortui;
    viget autem et vivil animus,_ The body of the sleeper lies as
    though dead; but his mind lives and flourishes.

    [Footnote 3: Delabrisa ... soplo. Prose order--_Al tenue soplo de
    la brisa nocturna_.]

    [Footnote 4: sube á la región vacia = 'rises into space.']

    [Footnote 5: Vive fuera, ó va dentro de nosotros = 'is an
    independent fact, or the product of our imagination.']

    [Footnote 6: conozco ... no conozco = 'I am acquainted with many
    people (because I have met them in thought or in dreams) whom I do
    not know (have never met in the flesh, nor heard of).' Having met
    other souls while wandering in dreams (line 8) or in some way
    equally difficult of rational explanation, I have a circle of
    acquaintances that transcends the list of those of whom I have
    knowledge in any recognized way. The thought is thus identical
    with that of Kipling's story "The Brushwood Boy."]




VOCABULARY


á, to, at, on, by, with, from, in, within, according to; _sign of the
object after transitive verbs before a personal object, and often
before any animate object;_ -- impulsos de, moved by, overcome by; --
lo largo de, along; -- mas de, besides; -- más y mejor, the best they
could; the most possible; vying with one another; a -- la media hora,
within half an hour; -- medias, half; -- medio abrir, half open; al
parecer, seemingly; -- poco, in a little while; -- poco de, shortly
after; --los pocos minutos, within a few minutes; estar al ponerse, to
be about to set; -- propósito, suited, suitable, desirable; by the
way; apropos; -- lo que, as far as; from what; as; ¿-- que? why?
wherefore? al revés, backwards; -- no saber, had I not known; -- no
ser, unless it be; -- no ser por, were it not for; -- solas, alone; --
tientas, groping; stealthily; -- través de, across, through; -- vida,
alive; al vuelo, flying; on the wing.

abad, _m._, abbot.

abadesa, _f._, abbess.

abajo, under, below; de arriba --, from top to bottom, from end to end.

abalanzarse, to rush upon.

abandonar, to abandon, desert, leave, let go, give up.

abandono, _m._, abandonment, abandon.

abanico, _m._, fan.

abarcar, to embrace, take in.

abatido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abatir, blown down, dimmed, dim.

abatir, to lower, take off, strike down; -- el vuelo, to alight.

abeja, _f._, bee.

abierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abrir, opened, open.

abigarrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ abigarrar, flecked, variegated, motley.

abismo, _m._, abyss, deep, depth.

abofetear, to buffet, slap, strike.

abogado, _m._, intercessor.

aborrecer, to abhor, hate.

abortar, to eject, abort, give untimely birth to.

abrasador, burning, ardent.

abrasar, to burn.

abrazar, to embrace.

abrazo, _m._, embrace.

abrevar, to water.

abrigo, _m._, shelter, protection.

abril, _m._, April.

abrillantar, to light up, make sparkle, cause to shine.

abrir, to open, open up; -- paso, to clear the way, make room;

á medio --, half open; _subst._, opening; en un -- y cerrar de ojos,
in the twinkling of an eye; in an instant; _refl._, to open (up), be
disclosed; to burst, swell.

absoulución, _f._, absolution.

absolutamente, absolutely.

absorto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.)_ of absorber, absorbed, amazed;
engrossed, spellbound.

abstracción, _f._, abstraction, separation.

absurdo, -a, absurd; _subst. m._, absurdity, nonsense.

abuela, _f._, grandmother.

abuelo, _m._, grandfather.

abultar, to enlarge, increase.

abundancia, _f._, abundance.

abundante, abundant, luxuriant profuse.

aburrido, _adj. pp. of_ aburrir, tired, impatient.

aburrirse, to be bored, be perplexed grow impatient.

abusar, to impose (de, upon).

acá, here; de -- ... de acullá, here ... there; de -- para allá, from
point to point; hither and thither por --, in this direction.

acabar, to finish, end, close, succeed in; -- de, to have just; lo que
acababa de suceder, what had just happened; lo que acabamos de
escuchar, what we have just listened to; ¡Acabáramos de una vez! well
and good! quien (en) mal anda, (en) mal acaba, a bad beginning makes a
bad ending.

acaecer, to happen, befall.

acalorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acalorar, heated, hot.

acariciar, to caress, fondle, delight.

acaso, _m._, chance; por --, perchance; _adv._, perhaps, perchance.

accidentado, -a, broken, rugged.

accidente, _m._, accident, property, peculiarity, roughness,
irregularity.

acción, _f._, act, action.

acecho, _m._, ambush.

aceite, _m._, oil.

acento, _m._, tone, accent, voice, word, expression; decía aún su --,
his accents kept repeating.

acerca: -- de, about.

acercar, to approach, bring near; _refl._, to approach.

acero, _m._, steel; sword.

acertado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acertar, ascertained, accurate.

acertar, to succeed, be able; -con, to hit upon, find, be certain of.

acicate, _m._, spur, rowel.

aclimación, _f._, acclamation.

aclamar, to acclaim.

acoger, to receive; _refl._, to resort, take refuge.

acometedor, _m._, undertaker, one who undertakes.

acometer, to attack, seize.

acomodar, to accommodate, lodge, quarter, furnish with lodging.

acompañamiento, _m._, accompaniment.

acompaiiante, _m._, companion.

acompañar, to accompany.

acompasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ acompasar measured, regular.

aconsejar, to counsel, advise.

acontecer, to happen.

acordarse, to recollect, remember; -- de, to remember.

acorde, _m._, accord, harmony.

acortarse, to slacken, abate, diminish.

acosar, to molest, harass.

acostar, to lay, place; _refl._, to lie down, go to bed.

acostumbrar, to accustom; to be accustomed.

actitud, _f._, attitude, posture; colocarse en -- de defensa, to fall
on guard.

acto, _m._, act, occasion, incident; -- continuo, straightway,
immediately, immediately afterward.

actor, _m._, actor.

actual, present.

acuático, -a, aquatic.

acudir, to go, come, repair to, run up, hasten, gather, flock, rush.

acuerdo, _m._, agreement; ponerse de --, to come to an agreement; to
agree.

acullá, there; ... de acá ... de --, ... here ... there.

acurrucarse, to conceal oneself; to crouch down.

acusar, to accuse; -- de, to accuse as (_or_ of) being.

adarme, _m._, half a drachm (_or_ dram); minute quantity; mite; dos
--s de imaginación, the least bit of imagination.

adelantar, to advance, proceed; _refl._, to advance, proceed,
approach, go, hasten.

adelante, forward, further; desde allí en --, from that time on; hacia
--; forward; más --, further on, later; ¡--! forward!

ademán, _m._, attitude, gesture, manner, action, motion.

adentro, within.

aderezar, to get ready, prepare, clean.

adiós, _m._, farewell; ¡--! good-by!

adivinar, to divine, guess, observe, note.

administrar, to administer.

admirable, admirable.

admiración, _f._, admiration, wonder.

admirar, to admire, esteem; _refl._, to be seized with admiration; to
marvel.

admitir, to admit, receive.

adolescencia, _f._, adolescence.

adónde (and adonde), _int. (and rel.) adv. and conj._, whither, where;
-- quiera, wheresoever, wheresoe'er.

adoración, _f._, worship, adoration, devotion; _pl., same meanings._

adorador, _m._, adorer.

adormido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ adormir, drowsy, heavy with sleep.

adornar, to adorn.

adosado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ adosar, placed (resting, standing, _or_
leaning) against.

adulador, fawning.

advertencia, _f._, advice, information.

advertir, to notice, advise, inform, warn; pues es de --, and you must
remember (know _or_ bear in mind).

aéreo, -a, aërial, of (_or_ pertaining to) the air.

afable, courteous, gracious.

afán, _m._, eagerness, eager desire.

afectado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afectar, feigned, affected.

afectar, to affect.

afilado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afilar, sharpened, sharp.

afilar, to grind, whet, sharpen.

afirmar, to affirm, assert.

afligido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ afligir, afflicted, wretched, miserable.

afligir, to afflict, make wretched (_or_ miserable).

afortunadamente, fortunately.

agarrarse, to grasp, clasp, seize, hold tightly.

agasaparse, to conceal oneself.

ágil, agile, fleet.

agilidad, _f._, agility, celerity.

agitación, _f._, excitement, agitation.

agitar, to agitate, move, shake; _refl._, to move restlessly, be
agitated; to wave, flutter.

agolparse, to crowd, rush.

agonía, _f._, agony, act of expiring.

agotar, to exhaust.

agradable, agreeable, pleasant.

agrupar, to group, collect; _refl._ to come together; to assemble,
collect.

agua, _f._, water; -- bendita, holy water.

aguacero, _m._, shower, torrent of rain.

aguardar, to expect, await, wait for; hacerse --, to delay in
appearing.

agudo, -a, sharp, acute, biting, piercing.

aguijonear, to thrust, impel, drive (_or_ spur) on.

aguja, _f._, needle, spire.

agujero, _m._, hole.

¡ah! ah! oh!

ahí, here, there; por --, hereabouts.

ahogar, to suffocate, smother, drown; to be repressed (_or_ confined).

ahora, now; desde --, from now on.

ahorcar, to hang.

aire, _m_, air, look, appearance, manner, tune, melody.

airoso, -a, airy, graceful; más airosa, with better grace; _adv._,
gracefully.

aislado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ aislar, isolated.

ajimez, _m._, ajimez, pointed (_or_ arched) double window divided in
the middle by a column.

ajorca, _f._ bracelet.

al = á + el; -- salir, as I was going out.

ala, _f._, wing, pinion.

alabastro, _m._, alabaster.

alado, -a, winged, soaring.

alali, _m._, alali, a hunting cry.

alameda, _f._, grove of poplar-trees.

álamo, _m._ poplar, white poplar.

alargar, to extend, raise.

alarido, _m._, outcry, shout, howl, yell.

alarma, _m. or f._, alarm; poner en --, to alarm.

alazán, _m._, sorrel horse.

alba, _f._: dawn.

albedrío, _m._, free will; con libre --, of (her) own free will.

albergarse, to take up lodgings.

albino, _m._, albino.

albor, _m._, (poet.) dawn.

alborotar, to disturb; _refl._, to be disturbed, be turbulent.

alboroto, _m._, disturbance, noise.

alborozado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ alborozar, exhilarated, rejoicing,
gleeful, joyous.

alborozo, _m._, joy, rejoicing, rapture.

alcaide, _m._, jailer, warden, governor (of a castle).

alcance, _m._, reach, range.

alcanzar, to succeed, be able; to overtake, reach, attain, come to; to
comprehend; á la (gente) que sele alcanza, those (persons) who are
good judges of.

alcázar, _m._, castle.

aldaba, _f._, bar, cross-bar, knocker.

aldea, _f._, village, hamlet.

aldeano, _m._, peasant, villager.

alegar, to allege, adduce.

alegrarse, to rejoice, exult, be glad.

alegre, pleasant, joyful, bright, joyous, merry.

alegremente, joyfully, merrily.

alegría, _f._, joy, gladness.

alejar, to remove, take away; _refl._, to go away, disappear.

alerce, _m._, larch, genus of coniferous trees.

alfombra, _f._, carpet, rug.

Alfonso, _m._, Alphonso.

alga, _f._, seaweed, alga.

algarabía, _f._, jargon, babble, clatter, hubbub.

algazara, _f._, rejoicing, shout(s), shouting.

algo, something, anything, some what; -- es --, something is better
than nothing; that is something.

algodón, _m._, cotton.

alguacil, _m._, constable, alguazil.

algún. See alguno.

alguno, -a, some, any; -- que otro, here and there one; a very few;
some.

aliaga, _f._, furze, a thorny evergreen shrub with beautiful yellow
flowers.

aliento, _m._, breath.

aligerar, to lighten, ease.

alimaña, _f._, (_obs._) animal.

aliviar, to alleviate, mitigate, relieve.

alma, _f._, soul, spirit.

almena, _f._, turret.

almohada, _f._, pillow.

alojamiento, _m._, lodging, quarters.

alojarse, to lodge, find lodgings (_or_ quarters).

alondra, _f._, lark.

Alonso, _m._, Alonzo, Alphonso.

alquería, _f._, farmhouse.

alrededor, around; -- de, about, round; á su --, around him; _subst.
m. pl._, environs, neighborhood.

altanero, -a, haughty, proud.

altar, _m._, altar; -- mayor, high altar, chief altar.

alterarse, to be disturbed.

alternado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ alternar, alternating, intermittent,
recurrent.

alteza, _f._, highness.

altisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ alto, very high, lofty.

altivo, -a, haughty.

alto, -a, tall, high, deep, lofty; important, late, loud; en la alta
noche, in the dead of night; late at night; _subst. m._, height,
summit, top.

alto, _m._, halt; mandar hacer --, to give orders to halt; ¡--! halt!

altura, _f._, height, summit.

alucinación, _f._, hallucination.

alumbrar, to give light to; to enable to see; to light up.

alzar, to raise, lift up; _refl._, to rise, heave.

allá, there; más --, farther; beyond; on past; -- al filo de la media
noche, just about midnight; -- por ..., back there in...; port --, in
that direction, thither, there; de acá para --, from point to point;
hither and thither.

allegados, _m. pl._, friends, allies.

allegar, to collect, get together.

allí, there; desde en adelante, from that time on; ya --, (when they
had) arrived there.

amado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ amar, beloved, loved.

amaestrar, to break in; to train, teach

amalgama, _f._, amalgamation, mixture

amanecer, to dawn; all --, at dawn; at break of day; hasta el --, till
break of day; until dawn; nos amanecía llorando, doawn found us
weeping.

amante, _subst. m. or f._, lover, beloved, loved one.

amar, to love.

amargo, -a, bitter, painful.

amarillo, -a, yallow

ambición, _f._, ambition.

ámbito, m. confines, inclosure, body, compass.

ambos, -as, both.

amenaza, _f._, threat, menace.

amenazador, menacing, threatening.

amenazar, to threaten.

amigablemente, amicably, pleasantly.

amigo, _m._, friend.

amigote, _m._ great friend, intimate friend.

amistad, _f._, friendship.

amonestación, _f._, advice, admonition, warning.

amontonar, to pile up, heap up, crowd together.

amor, _m._, love; sweetheart; -- propio, self-love, conceit, vanity.

amoroso, -a, amorous, loving, dear.

amortiguar, to temper, soften.

amparar, to protect, aid, assist, help.

amparo, _m._, succor, protection, refuge.

amplio, -a, full.

analizar, to analyze.

anciano, -a, old, aged, ancient; _subst. m. or f._, old man, old
woman; _m. pl._, old people, elders.

ancho, -a, large, broad.

anchuroso, -a, spacious.

andar, to go, walk, act, be; á más --, at full speed; como se las
entrase á más -- el día, as the day went on; as the day passed (for
them); -- penando, to suffer torment; -- por, to go about, be current
in; -- más de sobra, to be more in excess; á los talones, to follow
closely; de algún tiempo á esta parte anda, (who) for some time now
has been; quien (en) mal anda, (en) mal acaba, a bad beginning makes a
bad ending.

andas, _f. pl._, bier (with shafts), stretcher, litter.

andurriales, _m. pl._, by-roads, retired spots, out-of-the-way places.

anegarse, to be inundated (_or_ submerged).

anfiteatro, _m._, amphitheater.

anfitrión, _m._, amphitr-yon, host.

angel, _m._, angel.

angosto, -a, narrow, close.

ángulo, _m._, angle, corner.

anguloso, -a, angular.

angustia, _f._, anguish.

angustioso, -a, full of anguish, heartrending, desperate, terrible,
agonizing.

anilla, _f._, ring.

anillo, _m._, ring, coil.

ánima,_f._, soul; en Dios y en mi --, in very truth; God knows (that
it is true).

animación, _f._, animation.

animado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ animar, animated, enlivened, heated, moved,
encouraged, heightened.

animadversión, _f._, censure, reproof, hostility.

animal, _m._, animal.

animar, to animate, encourage, urge on.

ánimo, _m._, mind, thought, intention, spirit; recobrar el --, to
recover one's senses; to come to oneself.

anoche, last night.

ansia, _f._, anxiety, agony; eager desire, love, longing.

ansiedad, _f._, anxiety; con --, anxiously.

ansioso, -a, anxious, eager, desirous.

ante, before, in the presence of.

antemano: de --, beforehand, previously.

antepasados, _m. pl._, ancestors.

antepecho, _m._, breastwork, balcony, balustrade.

anterior, former; la noche --, the night before.

anteriormente, previously, before.

antes, formerly, before, first, rather, once; -- de, before; -- de
tiempo, prematurely; before it was ripe; -- que, before; rather than,
sooner than; far from; las -- losas sepulcrales, the once sepulchral
slabs.

antiguo, -a, old, ancient, former.

antojarse, to have a fancy (_or_ desire) (_used only in the 3rd person
sing., with_ me, te, le, etc.); antojábaseme, it seemed to me; I
fancied.

antojo, _m._, whim, fancy, caprice.

anublar, to cloud, darken.

anudarse, to become choked; to die away.

anunciar, to announce, foretell.

anuncio, _m._, announcement.

añadidura, _f._; addition; por --, besides, in addition.

añadir, to add.

año, _m._, year; el -- que viene, next year; allá por los --s de mil
trescientos y pico, back there in the year thirteen hundred and
something.

añoso, -a, old, ancient.

apacible, placid, quiet, pleasant, peaceful, serene.

apaciguarse, to be (_or_ become) calm; to be appeased.

apagar, to put out, extinguish, quench; _refl._, to go out, die out,
be extinguished; to become calm (_or_ silent).

apalear, to beat, cudgel.

aparecer, to appear.

aparición, _f._, appearance, apparition.

apariencia, _f._, appearance.

apartar, to take away, remove, put aside, separate; -- la vista, to
look away; _refl._, to depart, swerve.

aparte de, aside from.

apasionado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apasionar, passionate.

apearse, to alight, dismount.

apedrear, to stone.

apelar, to appeal.

apellidar, to call.

apenas, hardly, barely; -- sí, hardly, barely; -- sí pudiera, I could
scarcely.

apercibir, to prepare, get ready; to warn.

apilar, to pile (_or_ heap) up.

apiñado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apiñar, pyramidal, heaped up, crowded,
closely pressed, dense; --os grupos, dense crowds, closely packed
groups; -as matas, tangled (_or_ dense) shrubbery (_or_ under-brush);
-as olas, tossing waves.

apiñar, to heap up, press (_or_ crowd) together; to mass; _refl._, to
a crowd.

aplastar, to flatten, crush, weigh down, smash, destroy.

aplauso, _m._, applause; _pl._, applause.

aplicar, to apply.

aplomo, _m._, assurance, self-possession.

apoderarse, to take possession (de, of).

aposentador, _m._, quartermaster; sargento --, quartermaster-sergeant.

apostarse, to post oneself, take up a position.

apoyado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apoyar, supported, leaning.

apoyarse, to rest, be supported, support oneself, bear upon, lean (en,
on, upon).

apreciar, to value, appreciate.

aprecio, _m._, esteem, regard.

aprehender, to take; to capture.

aprender, to learn; -- de memoria, to memorize, learn by heart.

aprensión, _f._, apprehension, imagination, groundless fear (de, on
the part of).

aprestarse, to make preparations.

apresurar, to hasten, quicken; _refl._, to hasten, make haste.

apresurado, _adj. pp. of_ apresurar, quickened, hasty, rapid, in
haste, convulsive; _adv._, convulsively.

apretado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ apretar, crowded, dense, difficult.

aprisionar, to confine, imprison.

aprobar, to approve, show one's pleasure.

apropósito de, about, with regard to.

aprovechar, to take advantage of, profit by, avail oneself of, seize..

aproximación, _f._, approach, proximity.

aproximarse, to approach, draw near; ir aproximando, to approach.

apurar, to exhaust, clean up, drain; to try, test.

apuro, _m._, difficulty, straits.

aquel, --la, --lo, that.

aquél, --la, --lo, the one, that one, the former.

aqui, here; pasar de --, to go (any) further (_or_ farther); por --,
here, hereabouts, hither; he --, here is (_or_ are); behold.

ara, _f._, altar.

árabe. Arabic, Moorish.

aragonés, Aragonese, of (_or_ pertaining to) Aragon.

araña, _f._, spider.

árbol, _m._, tree.

arbusto, _m._, shrub, bush.

arca, _f._, chest, coffer.

arcada, _f._, arcade, arch.

arcángel, _m._, archangel.

arco, _m._, arch, archway, entrance

arch, niche, recess; --iris, rainbow.

arder, to burn, blaze, glow.

ardid, _m._, cunning, trick.

ardiente, ardent, fiery, burning, glowing.

ardor, _m._, ardor, fire, heat.

ardoroso, -a, burning, glowing.

arena, _f._, sand.

arista, _f._, straw; fiber (of plants).

arma, _f._, arm, weapon; el haz de --s, panoply; hacer sus (primeras)
--s, to learn fencing.

armada, _f._, fleet, armada.

armadura, _f._, annor

armar, to arm.

armario, _m._, wardrobe, cabinet; no tener su alma en su --, not to
have one's soul in the right place; to have one's soul in an abnormal
condition.

armonía, _f._, harmony.

armónico, -a, harmonious, without discord; melodious, with sweet
sounds.

armonioso, -a, harmonious, regular, beautiful.

aroma, _m._, aroma, odor, perfume.

arpa, _f._, harp, lyre.

arpón, _m._, harpoon, javelin, shaft.

arqueólogo, _m._, archaeologist.

arquero, _m._, archer, bowman.

arrancar, to pull off, snatch away, pull out, tear, wrest, draw,
obtain, deprive of; to produce; to awaken suddenly.

arrancharse, to camp; to mess.

arranque, _m._, passion, burst of passion.

arrastrar, to trail, drag along the ground, draw on, attract, bring
up, take, carry, drag, touch, draw away; _refl._, to drag oneself; to
creep, crawl, drag along the ground, trail; to be convinced, be
induced.

arrebatar, to carry off, snatch away.

arrebato, _m._, transport.

arrebolar, to redden.

arrebujarse, to wrap oneself up.

arreglar, to regulate.

arremolinar, to whirl; to heap (or pile) up.

arrepentido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ arrepentirse, repented, repentant.

arrepentirse, to repent.

arriba, above, over, up; de -- abajo, from top to bottom; from end to
end.

arriesgarse, to venture, risk oneself (por, through, in).

arrodillado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ arrodillarse, kneeling, on one's knees.

arrodillarse, to kneel.

arrogante, handsome, commanding.

arrojar, to throw, cast, fling, hurl forth; to shed, pour, emit,
utter; _refl._, to cast oneself; to fall.

arrostrar, to brave, face, encounter.

arroyo, _m._, rivulet, small stream.

arruinar, to ruin.

arte, _m. or f._, art, artifice, trick.

articular, to speak, utter.

artista, _m._, artist.

artístico, -a, artistic.

arzobispo, _m._, archbishop.

asalto, _m._, assault, storm.

asaz, (_poet._) quite, enough.

ascenso, _m._, ascent.

asco, _m._, nausea, loathing.

ascua, _f._, coal, glowing coal.

asegurar, to assert, assure, secure.

asemejar, to resemble; _refl._, to resemble.

asenderear, to persecute.

asentarse, to be seated; to sit down; to be situated.

asentimiento, _m._, assent.

asesinar, to assassinate.

asesinato, _m._, assassination, murder.

así, thus, so.

asiduidad, _f._, assiduity, assiduous attention, zeal.

asiento, _m._, seat, chair.

asilo, _m._, asylum, sanctuary, shelter, refuge.

asir, to seize, grasp, lay hold of.

asistente, _m._, chief justice (of Seville); servant, orderly.

asistir, to be present; to assist; to witness.

asomado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ asomar, appearing, looking out.

asomar, to appear, be visible, loom up, look up, put out, show; en
hablando del ruín de Roma, cátale aqui que asoma, speak of the devil
and he will appear.

asombrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ asombrar, wondering, astonished,
frightened, terrified, anxious.

asombro, _m._, astonishment, surprise.

asombroso, -a, astonishing, marvelous.

aspecto, _m._, sight, appearance, aspect.

áspero, -a, rough, harsh, unkempt, rugged.

áspid, _m._, aspic, asp.

aspirar, to breathe in.

asqueroso, -a, loathsome, noisome.

asta, _f._, shaft, staff, trunk, body.

astilla, _f._, chip, splinter.

astro, _m._, star.

astuto, -a, cunning, crafty, sly.

asunto, _m._, circumstance, matter.

affair, event, incident, subject.

asustar, to frighten.

atabal, _m._, drum, kettledrum.

atajar, to stop.

atar, to bind, tie; -- bien corto, to tie very short; to hold in
strict subjection; -- de pies y manos, to bind hand and foot.

ateísmo, _m._, atheism, unbelief.

atención, _f._, attention.

atender, to pay attention to; to expect.

atento, -a, attentive, heedful.

aterrador, terrifying, frightful.

aterrar, to frighten, terrify.

atillo, _m._, bundle.

atmósfera, _f._, atmosphere.

atolondrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atolondrar, perplexed, confused; giddy,
wild, heedless.

átomo, _m._, atom, particle.

atónito, -a, astonished, amazed.

atractivo, _m._, charm, attraction.

atraer, to draw, attract, bring down.

atrás; back, backwards; -- de, behind.

atravesar, to cross, traverse.

atreverse, to dare, venture, have the courage.

atrevido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atreverse, daring, bold, rash, audacious.

atrevimiento, _m._, boldness, rashness.

atribulado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ atribular, afflicted, vexed, suffering.

atrio, _m._, portico, church porch.

atronador, deafening, thundering, thunderous.

atropellarse, to hurry, rush.

aturdido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ aturdir, perturbed, confused, bewildered,
stupefied, astonished, agitated.

aturdir, to disturb, confuse, bewilder.

auditorio, _m._, audience.

aullar, to howl.

aún (or aun), even, still, yet; no ... ni --, not even; -- cuando,
although; -- que, although.

aunque, although.

aura, _f._, gentle breeze, zephyr.

aurora, _f._ dawn.

ausencia, _f._, absence.

ausente, absent.

auto, _m._, judicial decree or sentence; warrant, edict; -- de fe,
public punishment by the Inquisition, often a public burning; (hence)
a great fire, a bonfire, a fire.

autor, _m._, author.

autoridad, _f._, authority.

autorizar, to authorize

avanzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ avanzar, advanced, late.

avanzar, to advance, progress.

avaro, -a, miserly, avaricious

ave, _f._, bird.

avenida, _f._, approach, avenue.

aventura, _f._, adventure, event, incident.

aventurarse, to venture.

aventurero, _m._, adventurer, knight errant.

averiguar, to inquire, find out, investigate.

avidez, _f._, avidity; con --, eagerly.

avisado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ avisar, advised, informed.

aviso, _m._, warning.

¡ay! alas! ayes, _subst. m. pl._, lamentations.

ayer yesterday.

ayuda, _f._, aid, help, means.

ayudar, to aid, help.

ayuntamiento, _m._, municipal government, town (_or_ city) hall.

azar, _m._, hazard; al --, at hazard; at random.

azaroso, -a, hazardous, adventurous, venturesome.

azotar, to whip, lash, beat against, strike, cut.

azucena, _f._, lily, white lily.

azúl, blue; -- turquí, dark blue; _subst. m._, blue, indigo.

azulado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ azular, azured, bluish, indigo, blue.

azuzar, to set on, let loose, urge on.


B


bagaje, _m._, baggage; _pl._, baggage (of an army).

¡bah! bah!, nonsense!

bajar, to descend, lower, sink down, let fall, cast down, come down.

bajel, _m._, ship.

bajo, -a, low; _adv._, underneath, under, beneath.

balanceado. -a, _adj. pp. of_ balancear, balanced, swayed, swaying.

balancearse, to sway, totter, reel.

balbucear, to stammer.

balcón, _m._, balcony, casement window, balcony casement window.

balde: en --, in vain, vainly.

balsa, _f._, pool, lake.

Baltasara, _f._, (_Span._) Raltasara.

ballesta, _f._;, crossbow.

ballestero, _m._, archer, crossbowman.

banda, _f._, band, gang, flock.

bandada,_f,_, flock, crowd, band, swarm.

bandido, _m._, bandit.

bando, _m._, flock, flight.

bandolera, _f._, bandoleer, hunting-belt (slung across the shoulder).

banquillo, _m._, stool, bench.

bañar, to bathe, wash.

báquico, -a, bacchanal, bacchanalian.

barajarse, to writhe.

barandal, _m._, balustrade, railing.

barba, _f._, beard; _pl._, beard; y se le rieron en sus --s; and they
laughed in his face.

barón, _m._, baron, lord.

barra, _f._, bar.

barranco, _m._, gorge, precipice.

barrio, _m._, ward, quarter.

base, _f._, base, basis.

basta, enough, halt, stop.

bastante, sufficient, enough, sufficiently, rather, considerable; lo
--, sufficiently, enough.

bastar, to be sufficient; baste, let that suffice; enough.

batallar, to disagree, battle, be at odds.

batir, to beat, strike, clap; -- el cobre de firme, to be most
diligent; -- las palmas, to clap the hands; _subst._, beating; _refl._
to fight a duel.

beata, _f._, pious woman; lay sister.

bebedor, _m._, tippler, toper.

beber, to drink.

belleza, _f._, beauty.

bellisimo, -a, _abs._ supper. of bello, very (_or_ most) beautiful.

bello, -a, beautiful, handsome.

bendecir, to consecrate, bless.

bendición, _f._, benediction, blessing; que era una -- del cielo, in a
surprising way.

bendito, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ bendecir, blessed, holy,
consecrated.

benévolo, -a, benevolent, gracious.

besar, to kiss; to touch; llegar y -- el santo, to succeed in a brief
space of time; to find good fortune quickly.

beso; _m._, kiss.

biblioteca, _f._, library.

bien, _m._, good deed (or act), good, benefit; un -- de caridad, a
good turn, a benevolent favor; _pl._, property; _adv._, well, very; si
--, although, even if; mas --, rather; pues --, well, well then, well
now; ó --, or, or else; -- ... ó, whether ... or; either, or; porque
... ó por ser, whether because ... or because it was; -- que ... --
que, whether ... or; either because ... or because.

bigote, _m._, mustache.

birrete, _m._, cap, barret.

bisojo, -a, cross-eyed.

bizarro, -a, gallant, brave, highspirited, generous.

blanco, -a, white.

blancura, _f._, whiteness, whiteness of complexion.

blancusco, -a, whitish, gray.

blandamente, softly.

blandir, to brandish.

blando, -a, soft.

blanquear, to whiten, shine white; to bleach.

blasfemar, to blaspheme, curse.

blasfemia, _f._, blasphemy.

blasón, _m._, blazon.

bobo, _m._, dunce, fool.

boca, _f._, mouth; de --, on (his) face; de manos á --, all of a
sudden; unexpectedly; punto en --, silence, hush.

boca-calle, _f._, entrance (end _or_ opening) to a street.

bocado, _m._, morsel, bite.

boceto, _m._, sketch, outline.

bocina, _f._, trumpet, horn, bugle.

bofetada, _f._, buffet, blow.

bofetón, _m._, slap, blow.

bondad, _f._, kindness, goodness.

bondadoso, -a, benevolent, kind.

bonito, -a, pretty, charming, good, fine.

borceguf, _m._, buskin.

bordar, to border, embroider.

borde, _m._, edge, border, brink, bank.

bordón, _m._, staff.

borracho, -a, drunk, intoxicated.

borrar, to efface, erase; _refl._, to be effaced (_or_ blotted out).

borrascoso, -a, stormy, angry.

bosque, _m._, grove, forest, wood.

bosquecillo, _m._, coppice.

bosquejar, to sketch, paint.

bote, _m._, bound; boat; canister; box, toilet box, estar de -- en --,
to be cram full; to be completely filled.

botella, _f._, bottle.

Botero. See caldera.

botín, _m._, booty.

botón, _m._, button, bud.

bóveda, _f._, arch, vault.

bramar, to roar.

bramido, _m._, bellow, bellowing, belling; calling; clamor, noise,
blast.

¡bravo! bravo!

brazo, _m._, arm.

brecha, _f._, breach.

breña, _f._, bramble, brambles, thicket.

breve, short, brief; en-s palabras, in a few words.

brevísimo, -a, _abs._ sapper, of breve, very (_or_ most) brief.

brial, _m._, skirt, rich silken skirt.

brida, _f._, bridle.

brigada, _f._, brigade; general de --, brigadier-general.

brillante, brilliant, bright, radiant, clear.

brillar, to shine, gleam.

brillo, _m._, gleam, glitter, light, brilliancy, brightness.

brinco, _m._, leap, bound; dar un --, to leap, bound, jump.

brindar, to offer; to toast, drink a toast.

brindis, _m._, toast.

brisa, _f._, breeze.

brocade, _m._, brocade.

broma, _f._, rubbish; jest, joke; echar á --, to take (_or_ consider)
as a joke (_or_ jest).

bromear, to jest, joke, banter.

bronce, _m._, bronze.

broquel, _m._, shield, buckler.

brotar, to bud; to gush, issue, flow, burst forth, gush out.

bruja, _f._, witch.

brujeria, _f._, witchcraft.

bruma, _f._, mist, fog.

bruñido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ bruñir, burnished, polished.

bruto, _m._, brute, beast; clownish (_or_ ignorant) fellow.

buen. See bueuo.

bueno, -a, good, kind, well, fine; una buena, a good one; a warm
reception; Noche Buena, Christmas eve; mass of Christmas eve; --s
evaugelios, some holy sayings; some of the holy Scriptures; de buen
tono, fashionable; _subst._ _m._, good man, Christian.

buffet, _m._, (_French_) buffet, refreshment table.

bufido, _m_)., snort.

bufón, _m._, buffoon.

buho, _m._, owl.

bulto, _m._, bust, figure, form.

bulla, _f._, noise.

bullicio, _m._, bustle, noise, excitement.

bullicioso, -a, lively, restless, noisy, boisterous.

burla, _f._, joke, jest, jesting, scoffing, trick; hacer --, to play a
joke (_or_ trick).

burlado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ burlar, cheated, deceived, mocked, made
sport of, destroyed.

burlarse, to jest, mock, laugh at, make sport of.

burlón, jesting, joking, scoffing, mocking.

busca, _f._, search; echar en --, to go (_or_ set off) in search;
vamos en su --, let us look for her, let us go to her.

buscar, to seek, look for.

busilis, _m._, mystery.


C


cabal, just, exact, quite.

cabalgadura, _f._, beast (of burden), steed, mount.

cabalgar, to ride; to parade on horseback.

cabalgata, _f._, cavalcade.

caballería, _f._, horse, mount, saddlehorse, chivalry; _pl._,
chivalrous deeds.

caballero, _m._, knight, gentleman, lord, sir.

cabecear, to nod; to shake (_or_ toss) the head.

cabecera, _f._, head, head-piece, top (of the cross).

cabellera, _f._, hair.

cabello, _m._, hair; _pl._, hair.

caber, to be contained; to find room; to be; no cabía duda, there was
no doubt.

cabeza, _f._, head, head of hair.

cabezo, _m._, summit, peak.

cabo, _m._, end; al --, finally; llevar á --, to carry out; to
execute; to terminate successfully.

cacería, _f._, hunting expedition, hunting party.

cada, each, every; -- uno, each one; -- vez, each time; ever,
continually.

cadáver, _m._, corpse, cadaver.

cadena, _f._, chain.

cadencia, _f._, measure, beat, strain, cadence, cadenza.

caer, to fall; to strike (against something in falling); -- á pedazos,
to fall to pieces.

caída, _f._, fall.

calabozo, _m._, dungeon, cell.

calado, -a, of openwork; of fretwork; _pp. of_ calar, (of the hat)
pulled down, pressed down (over the eyes).

calamidad, _f._, calamity.

calar, to pull down, press down.

Calavera, _f._, skull; el Cristo de la --, Christ of the skull, the
crucifix with a skull (carved) at the feet of Christ.

calcáreo, -a, calcareous.

calcinar, to burn, reduce to ashes.

cálculo, _m._, estimate, calculation, expectation, computation.

caldera, _f._, caldron, kettle; en las --s de Pero Botero, (_coll._)
in the devil's boiler; in hell.

calentar, to warm.

calibre, _m._, caliber, sort, kind.

calidad, _f._, quality.

caliente, hot, fiery.

calificarse, to qualify, be designated (_or_ described).

caliginoso, -a, dim, dark, obscure, murky, dense.

cáliz, _m._, calyx.

calma, _f._, calm, composure, calmness, tranquillity, silence; con --,
calmly, with composure.

calmar, to calm, appease.

caluroso, -a, heated, hot.

calzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ calzar, shod, with hair growing low; frente
calzada, low forehead.

calzas, _f._ _pl._, breeches, trousers.

callado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ callar, silent.

callar, to be silent; ¡calle! hush! silence!

calle, _f._, street.

¡calle! See callar. callejón, _m._, lane, alley, narrow street.

cama, _f._, bed; caer en --, to fall sick.

cámara, _f._, chamber, bedroom.

camarada, _m._, comrade, companion.

cambiante, _m._, iridescence; iridescent gleam, glint.

cambiar, to change, exchange.

cambrón, _m._, bramble.

caminante, _m._, traveler.

caminar, to go, walk, walk along.

camino, _m._, way, road, journey, march, course; -- atras, back; down
(_or_ up) the road.

campana, _f._, bell, church bell.

campanada, _f._, stroke.

campanario, _m._, belfry, bell-tower; -- de espadaña, single-walled
bell-tower; belfry (of a single wall with openings for the bells).

campanero, _m._, bellman.

campanilla, _f._, small bell, hand-bell, bell; morning-glory.

campaña, _f._, campaign.

campiña, _f._, field, plain.

campo, _m._, field, camp.

canción, _f._, song.

candelabro, _m._, candlestick, chandelier.

candelilla, _f._, small candle.

candente, incandescent, red-hot.

cándido, white, snowy.

cangilón, _m._, bucket (or cup of an endless chain used in drawing
water). _See_ noria.

cano, -a, hoary, gray.

canónigo, _m._, canon, prebendary.

cansado, -a, _adj. pp._ of cansar, tired, wearied, weary.


cansarse, to bore oneself, be bored, be tired.

cantar, to sing, hum, buzz; -- entre dientes, to hum (a song).

cantar, _m._, song.

cántaro, _m._, pitcher, water-pitcher.

cantazo, _m._, stone, blow with a stone.

cantera, _f._, quarry.

cantidad, _f._, quantity, sum.

cántiga, _f._, song, metrical romance.

canto, _m._, song, hymn, chant, canticle, canto.

cantueso, _m._, lavender, French lavender, spike.

cañada, _f._, glen, dale, glade.

caño, _m._, stream, jet.

cañuto, _m._, fluting; gorguera de --s, fluted raff.

capa, _f._, cloak, mantle.

capaz, capable, able.

capellán, _m._, chaplain.

caperuza, _f._, pointed cap, pointed hood, hood.

capilla, _f._, chapel; maestro de --, choir-master, one who composes
and directs church music; -- mayor, main chapel (containing the pulpit
and high altar, and in most Spanish churches opposite the _coro_ and
separated from the transept by a railing).

capitán, _m._, captain.

capitel, _m._, capital.

capítulo, _m._, chapter, council, court.

capote, _m._, cloak, coat, greatcoat.

capotillo, _m._, mantelet, short cloak.

capotón, _m._, large cloak, greatcoat.

capricho, _m._, caprice, whim, fancy; á --, aimlessly.

caprichosamente, capriciously, fancifully.

caprichoso, -a, capricious.

capuchino, _m._, Capuchin monk

cara, _f._, face, countenance, expression, head.

caracolear, to caracole; caracoleando en sus corceles, on their
prancing steeds.

carácter, _m._, character, disposition.

caracterizar, to characterize, describe.

carbón, _m._, charcoal; coal.

carcajada, _f._, laugh, burst of laughter.

cárcel, _f._, prison, jail.

carcomer, to corrode.

cárdeno, -a, violet, livid.

cargo, _m._, charge, office; hacer -- de, to examine, inspect.

caricia, _f._, caress.

caridad, _f._, charity; un bien de -, a good turn, a benevolent favor.

cariiio, _m._, love, affection, tenderness.

Carlos, _m._, Charles.

carne, _f._, meat, flesh; _pl._, flesh; de-y hueso, of flesh and
blood.

caro, -a, dear; _adv._, dearly.

carraca, _f._, rattle, an instrument used instead of bells the last
three days of Holy Week.

carrasca, _f._, pin-oak, swamp-oak.

carrascal, _m._, plantation of pin-oaks; clump of pin-oaks.

carrera, _f._, race, course, speed.

carro, _m._, car, chariot.

carta, _f._, letter, card; tomar--en el asunto, to take a hand in the
matter; cartas leyes, summons.

casa, _f._, house; --de Consejos (_or_ --Consistorial), town hall,
city hall.

casaca, _f._, coat.

Casca, _f._, (_Span._) Casca.

cascada, _f._, cascade.

casco, _m._, helmet; hoof; outside (of anything);--s de las bote-llas
vacias, empty bottles.

caserfo, _m._, houses, row of houses; village, small town.

caserón, _m._, edifice, dwelling, large house.

casi, almost, very nearly.

casita, _f._, small house, cottage.

caso, _m._, case, event, circumstance, effect, fact, matter, affair;
es el --, the fact is; hacer--de, to pay attention to; to care about;
to consider important.

castellano, -a, Castilian, of (_or_ pertaining to) Castile.

castigar, to punish, chastise.

castigo, _m._, chastisement, punishment.

castillo, _m._, castle.

casto, -a, chaste, pure.

casualidad, _f._, chance.

casualmente, casually, by chance.

casulla, _f._, chasuble.

cata. See catar.

catar, to see, consider, notice; cátale aqui que asoma, why! (_or_
lo!) here it (_or_ he) comes. See ruin.

catástrofe, _f._, catastrophe.

catedral, _f._, cathedral.

catorce, fourteen.

cauce, _m._, drain, bed, stream, rivulet.

causa, _f._, cause.

causar, to cause.

caverna, _f._, cave, cavern.

cavidad, _f._, cavity, hollow.

cavilación, _f._, pondering, worrying, preoccupation.

caza, _f._, chase, hunt; andar á -- de, to go in pursuit of; to go
hunting (_or_ seeking); salir de --, to go hunting.

cazador, _m._, hunter, huntsman; --es furtivos, poachers.

cazar, to hunt.

ceder, to yield, submit.

cegar, to blind, make blind; to fill up, obstruct.

ceja, _f._, eyebrow.

cejar, to relax.

celda, _f._, cell.

celebrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ celebrar, celebrated, famous.

celebrante, _m._, officiating priest.

celebrar, to celebrate; _refl._, to be celebrated.

celeste, celestial, heavenly.

celo, _m._, zeal, ardor, devotion; _pl._, jealousy.

celoso, -a, jealous; tener --, to make jealous.

cena, _f._, supper.

cenagoso, -a, muddy, miry.

cencerrada, _f._, charivari.

cendal, _m._, crape, gauze.

cenizas, _f._ _pl._, ashes.

cenobita, _m._, cenobite.

centella, _f._, lightning, lightning flash (_or_ bolt), thunderbolt.

centésimo, -a, hundredth.

centinela, _m._, sentry, sentinel.

cerca, near, near at hand; -- de, near; tan de --, so closely; muy de
--, very closely, very well.

cercano, -a, near, close, next, neighboring.

cercar, to surround.

cerciorarse, to assure oneself; to ascertain.

cerco, _m._, circle.

cerebro, _m._, brain.

ceremonia, _f._, ceremony, service.

cernerse, to soar; to flit; to hover.

cerrar, to close, shut; la noche habia cerrado, night had come (_or_
fallen); night had closed in (around him); _subst._, shutting; en un
abrir y -- de ojos, in the twinkling of an eye; in an instant;
_refl._, to close, shut.

cerrojo, _m._, bolt.

cesar, to cease, stop, end; ir cesando, to cease, die out; sin --,
incessantly, continually.

césped, _m._, grass, sod, grass-plot, turf; _pl._, grasses.

cicerone, _m._, guide, cicerone.

ciego, -a, blind, blinded.

cielo, _m._, sky, heaven.

cien. See ciento.

ciencia, _f._, science, art, knowledge.

cieno, _m._, mire, filth.

ciento, hundred.

ciertamente, certainly, indeed.

cierto, -a, certain.

ciervo, _m._, deer, stag.

cierzo, _m._, north wind.

cifra, _f._, cipher; written character; writing.

cima, _f._, summit, top; por -- de, over; above the tops of.

cimera, _f._, crest.

cimiento, _m._, foundation.

cincelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cincelar, carved, engraved, embossed.

cinco, five.

cinta, _f._, ribbon, band, girdle; estar en --, to be pregnant; to
have conceived.

cintarazo, _m._, knock, thump, blow, slap (with something flat).

circular, to circulate, flow.

círculo, _m._, circle.

circunspección, _f._, circumspection, dignity.

circunstanciado, -a, circumstantial, minute, detailed.

circunstantes, _m. pl._; bystanders, listeners, hearers, persons
present.

cirio, _m._, (large) wax candle (by taper).

cisne, _m._, swan.

cita, _f._, appointment, rendezvous, tryst.

citar, to make an appointment (with), to give a rendezvous (to).

ciudad, _f._, city.

clamor, _m._, clamor, noise.

clamoreo, _m._, clamor, noise.

clarear, to grow light; to dawn.

claridad, _f._, light, shine.

clarín, _m._, trumpet.

clarísimo, -a, illustrious.

claro, -a, clear; _adv._, clearly.

clase, _f._, class, kind.

claustro, _m._, cloister, piazza, gallery.

clavado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ clavar, fixed, brim. fastened, rooted,
nailed.

clavar, to fix, fasten, nail; _refl._, to be fixed; to fix itself; to
stick, strike.

clave, _f._, keystone.

clavo, _m._, nail; point.

clero, _m._, clergy.

cobarde, coward, cowardly.

cobertizo, _m._, small projecting roof; shed.

cocodrilo, _m._, crocodile.

codazo, _m_, thrust with the elbow.

codiciado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ codiciar, coveted.

codicioso, -a, greedy, covetous.

codo, _m._, elbow.

coger, to catch, take up, pick up, pluck, collect, seize; cogerse, to
be caught; to be trampled (_or_ crushed).

coincidencia, _f._, coincidence.

cojín, _m._, cushion.

cola, _f._, tail.

colación, _f._, lunch.

colegio, _m._, college, school.

colegir, to gather, collect, deduce, infer

cólera, _f._, anger, fury, passion, rage, wrath

colérico, -a, angry, choleric, irascible, passionate.

coleto, _m._, doublet body; inside (_or_ body) of a man; echarse
(algo) al --, to swallow (at a gulp).

colgado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ colgar, suspended, hung, hanging.

colgar, to hang, suspend; to hang from, be suspended.

colina, _f._, hill.

colmar, to heap up, fill to the brim.

colmo, _m._, climax.

colocar, to place, set up; --se en actitud de defensa, to fall on
guard.

color, _m._, color, coloring, hue, complexion, shadings; de --(es),
colored, stained; -- de plomo, leaden, lead-colored; -- de rosa,
rose-colored.

colorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ colorar, colored, dyed, ruddy, florid,
red; sorrel.

colorearse, to redden, become red.

colorín, _m._, showy (_or_ vivid) color.

colosal, colossal, enormous.

columbrar, to discern, espy.

columna, _f._, column, body of soldiers; -- volante, flying column.

columnilla, _f._, little column; -- salomónica, little twisted column.

columpiarse, to swing.

comadre, _f._, a gossip.

comarca, _f._, district, border, country.

comarcano, -a, neighboring, of (_or_ pertaining to) the neighborhood.

combate, _m._, combat, duel.

combatiente, _m._, combatant.

combatir, to fight, beat, strike, attack.

combinación, _f._, combination.

comedimiento, _m._, courtesy, civility, politeness.

comentar, to comment upon, discuss.

comentario, _m._, commentary, remark.

comenzar, to begin; _reft._, to begin, commence.

comer, to eat; que se ha de -- la tierra, which the earth shall (one
day) swallow up.

cometa, _m._, comet.

cómico, -a, comical.

comitiva, _f_,. procession, cortège, retinue, company, suite, escort.

como, as, like, as if, as it were, as though, so to speak, apparently,
if, if only, provided that, as soon as; -- de, at (_or_ of) about;
about; á distancia de, something like a distance of; at about the
distance of; distant about; así --, as well as; as also; así ... --,
both ... and; -- no sea, unless it be; except; -- para, as if to; --
que, as; -- as if; inasmuch as; it was as if; he was as it were; --
quiera que, although; notwithstanding the fact that; tanto --, as much
as; tal --, just as; tan --, as.. as; tan pronto ... -- ..., now ...
now ...; ¡-- ha'de ser! that's the way of the world! what can you
expect? what is to be expected? -- pudo, as best he could; -- las
gasta, how he acts.

¿cómo? how? why?

compacto, -a, compact, dense.

compañera, _f._, companion, mate.

companero, _m._, companion, comrade, associate.

comparable, comparable.

comparación, _f._, comparison.

comparar, to compare.

comparecer, to appear.

compás, _m._, measure, time, accompaniment, rhythm, beat.

compasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ compasar, measured, regular.

compasión, _f._, compassion, pity.

compeudioso, -a, laconic.

complacerse, to take pleasure (en, in).


completamente, completely.


completar, to complete.


completo; -a, complete; por --, completely.

componer, to compose, repair, keep in repair; _refl._, to be composed;
to consist.

comprar, to buy.


comprender, to understand, comprehend; hacerse --, to make oneself
understood.


comprimir, to restrain, compress, suppress.


comprometerse, to compromise oneself, risk one's reputation, lay
oneself open to criticism.


comunicar, to communicate; _refl._, to communicate.


comunidad, _f._, community, order; en --, by ourselves; with only the
members of the order present.



con, with, along with, by, among; para --, amongst; -- que, therefore,
wherefore, so then; -- vida, alive.


concebir, to conceive.

concejo, _m._, council.


concepto, _m._, conceit, thought, fancy.

concertar, to hold (secret) council; to plan, concert.


conciencia, _f._, conscience, consciousness.


concierto, _m._, concert, arrangement, method.


conciliábulo, _m._, conventicle, secret council.

concluido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ concluir, concluded; after.

concluir, to conclude, end, finish, complete, infer.

concurrente, _m._, person present; bystander, spectator; _pl._,
assembly, congregation, audience.

concha, _f._, shell.

condado, _m._, earldom, county.

conde, _m._, earl, count.

condenación, _f._; condemnation, damnation.

condenar, to condemn, damn.

condesa, _f._, countess.

condición, _f._, condition, circumstance.

conducir, to lead, conduct, convey, bear, bring in.

conducta, _f._, conduct, leadership, guidance.

confesar, to confess, acknowledge.

confesión, _f._, confession.

confesor, _m._, confessor, a priest authorized to hear confession of
sins and to grant absolution.

confirmar, to confirm.

conforme, agreeable to; according to.

conformidad, _f._, agreement; state, condition.

confundir, to confuse, confound, mingle, unite; _refl._, to lose form
(_or_ substance); to blend, be confused (confounded or mingled); to
mingle, intermingle, vanish, be lost, be lost to sight (en, in).

confusamente, confusedly.

confusión, _f._, confusion, complication.

confuso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ confundir, confused, perplexed,
indistinct.

congregar, to assemble.

conjunto, _m._, ensemble, collection, combination.

conjurar, to conjure, beseech.

conjuro, _m._, incantation, enchantment.

conmigo, with me.

conmoción, _f._, commotion.

conmover, to move, affect.

conmovido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ conmover, affected, moved, in (_or_ with)
emotion.

conocer, to know, recognize, realize, be acquainted with.

conquistar, to conquer.

consagración, _f._, consecration.

consagrar, to consecrate.

conseguir, to succeed, obtain.

conseja, _f._, fable, story.

consejo, _m._, council, advice; Casa de --s, town hall, city hall.

consentir, to agree (_or_ consent) to.

conservar, to keep, guard.

consigo, with himself, with herself, with itself, with oneself, with
themselves.

consiguiente, _m._, consequence; por --, consequently, therefore,
hence.

consistencia, _f._, consistency, coherence.

consistir, to consist, lie; no sé en qué consista, I do not know why.

consistorial. See casa.

constante, constant.

Constanza, _f._, Constance.

constelación, _f._, constellation.

consternado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ consternar, dismayed, in consternation.

construcción, _f._, fortification.

consuelo, _m._, comfort, consolation.

consultar, to consult, ask, advise, consult about, ask advice about.

consumir, to consume, eat, cost.

consunción, _f._, consumption.

contacto, _m._, contact, touch.

contar, to count, recount, relate, tell; -- con, to count (_or_ rely)
upon.

contemplación, _f._, contemplation.

contemplar, to contemplate.

contener, to contain, hold, repress, restrain.

contenido, _m._, contents.

contentamiento, _m._, satisfaction, pleasure.

contestatión, _f._, reply.

contestar, to reply.

continuamente, continually.

continuar, to continue.

continuo, -a, continual; de --, continually; acto --, straightway,
immediately, immediately afterward.

contorno, _m._, form, waist, trunk, torso; circuit, radius; veinte
jornados al --, within a radius of twenty days' journey.

contorsión, _f._, contortion; hacer una --, to bend one's body; to
writhe.

contra, against, contrary to; en -- mía, against myself; against my
interests.

contraer, to contract.

contraído, -a, _adj. pp. of_ contraer, contracted, rigid.

contraposición, _f._, contrast.

contrario, _m._, contrary, reverse, opposite, opponent, adversary; al
--, on the contrary; por el --, on the contrary.

contraste, _ m._, contrast.

contribuir, to contribute, serve.

convecino, _m_, neighbor.

convencer, to convince.

conveniencia, _f._, advantage, utility, expediency.

convenir, to agree, come to an agreement, acknowledge.

convento, _m._, convent, cloister, monastery.

conversación, _f._, conversation.

convertir, to change, convert, metamorphose.

convidado, _m._, guest.

convito, _M._, feast, banquet.

convulsión, _f._, convulsion.

convulsivamente, convulsively.

convulsivo, -a, convulsive, rigid, convulsed, trembling, shaking.

coordinar, to collect, arrange.

copa, _f._, cup, goblet, drinking cup; summit, crest, crown.

copia, _f._, copy.

copiar, to copy, reproduce.

copla, _f._, couplet; _pl._, verses.

copudo, -a, copped, crested.

coral, _m._, coral.

corazón, _m._, heart; hacerse de tripas--, to pluck up courage.

corcel, _m._, steed, charger.

cordero, _m._, lamb.

cornisa, _f._, cornice.

coro, _m._, choir, chorus.

corona, _f._, crown.

coronar, to crown, adorn, deck.

corporación, _f._, body; en--, in a body.

corpulento, -a, large, bulky.

corregidor,_m._, corregidor, a Spanish magistrate; a mayor of a town.

correo, _m._, messenger, courier;--de gabinete, state messenger,
king's messenger.

correr, to run, move, be current, flow; á todo (el)--, at full speed.

correría, _f._, incursion, raid.

corresponder, to correspond.

corriente, usual, current; _subst. m._, current, course; al -- de,
conversant (or acquainted) with; muy al --, well informed; _subst.
f._, current (of streams).

corrillo, _m._, circle, gathering, knot, group.

corro, _m._, circle, group.

cortado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cortar, cut, interrupted, abashed,
confounded; --á pico, perpendicular, precipitous.

cortadura, _f._, gorge, ravine.

cortar, to cut, cut off, intercept, interrupt; terreno, to make a
short cut; to shorten the way (_or_ distance).

corte, _f._, court; de--, trenchant, sharp-edged.

cortejar, to court, win the affection of.

cortejo, _m._, procession, cortege.

cortés, courteous, polite.

cortesano, -a, courtly.

cortina, _f,_, curtain.

corto, -a, short.

corza, _f._, roe, doe.

cosa, _f._, thing, matter, matter of importance, fact; -- de, about;
desde habia -- de, for a matter of; for about; gran --, much, a great
deal; -- hecha, settled, decided; -- imposible, impossible; la -- no
era para menos, nothing less could be expected; publica, well-known,
notorious; qué --, what; ser -- de, to be sufficient cause to; to be
enough to; no ser --: not to be small (_or_ few in number), to be
large (_or_ numerous).

cosecha, _f._, production; de mi --, of my own invention.

coser, to sew, sew up.

cosquilla, _f._, ticklish point, weak point.

costa, _f._, cost, price; á --, at the cost.

costado, _m._, side.

costar, to cost.

costear, to skirt.

costumbre, _f._, custom, habit; de -- , customary, usual(ly); tener de
--, to be accustomed; to be one's custom.

cota, _f._, coat of mail.

coyuntura, _f._, occasion, opportunity.

craneo, _m._, cranium.

creación, _f._, creation.

crecer, to grow, increase.

creciendo, increasing, growing, swelling.

creciente, increasing, growing.

crédito, _m._, credit, belief; dar -- á, to believe.

credulidad, _f._, credulity.

creencia, _f._, belief.

creer, to believe, fancy, think.

crepúsculo, _m._, twilight.

cresta, _f._, crest, cresting, peak.

criado, _m._, servant.

Criador, _m._, Creator.

criatura, _f._, creature, being, woman; babe, baby, infant.

crimen, _m._, crime.

criminal, criminal.

crin, _f._, mane; _pl.,_ mane.

crispado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ crispar, agitated, convulsed, clinched,
trembling, nervous, convulsive.

crispar, to shrivel; to cause to creep.

cristal, _m._, crystal, glass, window; de --, crystalline, clear,
pure.

cristiano, _m._, Christian.

Cristo, _m._, Christ.

critica, _f._, criticism.

crónica, _f._, chronicle.

cronista, _m._, chronicler, narrator.

crucera, _m._, crossing, the place of crossing of nave and transept,
in some churches the choir.

crudo, -a, rude, coarse, pitiless, ruthless.

cruel, cruel.

crueldad, _f._, cruelty.

crujir, to crackle, clash, rustle, crack, clang.

cruz, _f._, cross.

cruzado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cruzar, interposed, intervening.

cruzar, to cross, pass by, pass, clasp, join.

cuadra, _f._, hall; stable; _pl._, quarters.

cuadro, _m._, picture, painting.

cuajar, to coat over; (_here_) to begem.

cual, which; such, as, such as; el --, la--, lo--, who, which; por
lo--, wherefore; cada --, each (_or_ every) one; -- si, as if; tal --,
such as; todas á -- más bellas, vying with one another in loveliness;
each one more lovely than the other.

cuál, what, which, which one; -- .,. --, one...one.

¿cual? what? which?

cualidad, _f._, quality; _pl._, disposition.

cualquier. See cualquiera.

cualquiera, anybody, whatever, whoever, any.. whatever, one, some; --
otro, any one else; -- otra cosa, anything else; -- que, whoever.

cuando, when; aun --, although; hasta --, how long; de yez en --, from
time to time; every now and then; at intervals; de -- en --, from time
to time.

¿cuándo? when?

cuanto, how much, as much, as much as, whatever, as many as, that
which, what.

cuanto, _adv._, as much as; en --, as soon as, when; en -- á, as to,
as for, as regards; -- quedarepetido, as has been said.

¿cuánto? how much? what? _pl._, how many?

cuarenta, forty.

cuarta, _f._, fourth, quarter, fourth part (of a _vara_),
hand-breadth; hundir una -- de hierro, to bury the spurs; to spur
deeply.

cuartel, _m._, quarters.

cuartilla, _f._, sheet.

cuarto, _m._, quarter.

cuatro, four.

cubierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cubrir, covered, overcast, cloaked;
shrub-covered; s&t. _m._, cover; á --, under shelter.

cubilete, _m._, dice-box.

cubrir, to cover, cloak.

cuchillo, _m._, knife; -- de monte, hunting-knife, hunter's cutlass.

cuello, _m._, neck.

cuenca, _f._, valley, deep valley surrounded by mountains.

cuenta, _f._, account, reckoning, calculation, explanation; tener en
--, to take into account; to consider, darse -- de, to realize.

cuento, _m._, story, fiction, tale, fable; de nunca acabar,
never-ending story.

cuerda, _f._, cord, string, rope.

cuerpo, _m._, body, corpse; story, floor, section (of a building up to
the cornice).

cuesta, _f._, hill, slope.

cuestión, _f._, question, matter.

cuidado, _m._, care, wory; _pl._, care, attentions; ¡ -- ! mind!
notice! -- con (_or_ que), mind, stop, beware, look out, notice; no
haya --, don't worry; never mind; apprehension (_or_ care).

cuidar, to take care, look after, care for, care, pay attention,
notice.

cuja, _f._, socket, lance-bucket.

culebra, _f._, snake.

culpa, _f._, fault, crime, blame, sin, guilt.

culto, _m._, worship.

cumbre, _f._, summit, mountain ridge.

cumplido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ cumplir, polished, accomplished,
faultless.

cumplir, to perform, fulfill, discharge accomplish.

cuna, _f._, cradle; iguales en --, equals in point of birth.

cundir, to spread.

cupula, _f._, cupola, dome.

cura, _m._, curate, priest, rector.

curiosidad, _f._, curiosity.

curioso, -a, curious, inquisitive.

curso, _m._, course.

curva, _f._, curve, winding.

cúspide, _f._, point, summit, peak.

cuyo, -a, whose.

¿cúyo? whose?


Ch


Champagne, _m._, champagne.

chanzoneta, _f._, jest, joke, nonsense.

chapar (en), to plate (with); to cover (with).

chapín, _m._, clog, patten, chopine.

charla, _f._, gossip, chat.

charlar, to gossip, chat.

chasquido, _f._, crackling, lashing, dashing, cracking, creaking,
rustling.

chico, -a, small; _subst. m. or f._, little one; child.

chirrido, _m._, grating, rubbing, friction rattle, sound, squeak,
swish, rasping.

chispa, _f._, spark.

chispeante, sparkling, dazzling.

chispear, to sparkle.

chisporrotear, to crackle.

chisporroteo, _m._, hissing, crackling.

chiste, _m._, joke, jest.

chocar, to clang, rattle, clatter, strike, knock.

chopera, _f._, forest (_or_ grove) of black poplars.

chopo, _m._, black poplar.

choque, _m._, shock, clang.

choza, _f._, hut, hovel.


D


dado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ dar, given, granted; considering, in view of.

dado, _m._, die, cube; _pl._, dice.

daga, _f._, dagger.

¡dale! the deuce! come! again! el -- que le das, the persistent
efforts.

dama, _f._, lady.

danzar, to dance.

daño, _m._, harm, injury.

dar, to give; -- crédito á, to believe; -- de firme, to beat firmly
(_or_ lustily); -- en, to rush (_or_ fall) headlong into; -- en la
flor, to take into one's head; to fall into the habit; -- fin, to die,
perish; --le á los fuelles, to pump the bellows; -- lugar, to give
rise; -- gusto, to gratify; -- de palos, to beat, give a beating; to
cudgel; -- un paso, to take a step; -- por, to consider, regard (as);
-- principio, to begin; -- que hacer, to give trouble; -- que reir
(con), to ridicule, make sport (of), make a laughing stock (of); --
razon de, to give an account of; to inform regarding; -- á alguno en
el rostro con, to cast in one's face; -- por seguro, to assert,
assure; -- susto, to frighten; tanto os da de, you think as highly of;
-- tumbos, to tumble; to whirl head over heels; -- vista á, to come
into view of; -- una gran voz, to call out loudly; -- una vuelta, to
take a turn, take a walk; -- vueltas, to turn, whirl, revolve; el dale
que le das, the persistent efforts; como Dios me daba á emender, to
the best of my ability; -- se cuenta de, to realize; -- se de ojo, to
conspire, have a secret understanding.

de, of, to, from, at, with, by, in, on, as, than; el bruto Esteban,
that clownish fellow Stephen; -- improviso, unexpectedly, suddenly; --
modo que, so that; -- nuevo, again; anew; -- por si, by himself; --
prisa, rapidly; -- pronto, suddenly, abruptly; -- repente, suddenly;
--seguro, assuredly; -- no ser, if not; -- sobra, over and above; --
tarde en tarde, seldom; -- un todo, once for all; del todo, wholly,
quite.

debajo, underneath, below; por -- de, beneath, below, under.

deber, to owe, be (destined) to, must, ought.

débil, weak, feeble, faint.

debilisimo, -a, _abs. super, of_ débil, very weak (feeble _or_ faint).

debilitarse, to be (or become) weak (faint, dim, or soft).

débilmente, faintly, softly.

decidir, to decide, determine; _refl._, to decide, determine.

decir, to say, tell, speak; se dice, it is said; dicen, they say,
people say; al -- de, according to; es --, that is; por --lo así, so
to speak; por mejor --, in other words, rather; ¿no os le dije? didn't
I tell you so? no se ha de --, it cannot be said; o mejor dicho, or
rather; querer --, to mean.

decisión, _f._, decision.

dedicar, to dedicate, consecrate.

dedo, _m._, finger; dos --s de luz, a thin streak of light.

defender, to defend, guard, protect, shield.

defensa, _f._, defense, guard.

deforme, deformed, formless, shapeless, misshapen, hideous.

dejar, to leave, let, allow, cease, leave off, abandon, fail; Como
dejo dicho, as I have said; según dejamos dicho, as we have said; --
entrever, to show slightly; -- escapar, to utter; -- lugar, to give
place; -- paso, to let pass, make way; no -- titers con cabeza, to
destroy everything, put everything in disorder; -- se ver, to appear,
show oneself; -- la vida, to die; déjase de decir, fails to be said,
is not said, is left unsaid; -- se sentir, to make itself felt.

del = de + el.

delante, before; -- de, before, in front of, in (the) presence of.

delgado, -a, thin, slender, delicate, flexible, gaunt.

deliberar, to deliberate.

delicado, -a, delicate, light.

delicioso, -a, delicious, exquisite, delightful.

delincuente, _m._, delinquent.

delirio, _m._, delirium, madness.

delito, _m._, crime.

demacración,_f._, emaciation.

demandadera, _f._, convent servant, woman who attends at the door of a
convent to run errands.

demás, further, besides; los --, the others, the rest; por lo --, for
the rest, moreover, besides.

demente, mad; _adv._, madly.

demonio, _m._, demon, devil.

demostrar, to show, manifest, demonstrate, evince.

dentellado, -a, dentated, dentate.

dentro, within; -- de, within, inside of, in.

deparar, to offer, provide.

departir, to speak, converse, chat, talk, dependiente, _m._,
dependent, servant.

depositar, to deposit.

derecho, -a, right; á la derecha, at (_or_ to) the right; á derechas,
straight, straight ahead; _subst. m._, right, claim, privilege; feudal
right (_or_ privilege); _adv._, straight.

derramado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ derramar, scattered, ranging.

derramar, to shed, cast, pour, plash, scatter, emit, pour out;
_refl._, to fall, be scattered (cast _or_ shed).

derredor, _m._, circumference, circuit; en --, around; en -- suyo,
around him, about him.

derretir, to melt, dissolve.

derribir, to demolish, destroy, fell, throw, cast.

derruido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ derruir, demolished, ruined, in ruins.

derrumbadero, _m._, precipice.

derrumbar, to fall with a crash.

desacato, _m._, disrespect, insolence.

desafiar, to defy, challenge.

desafío, _m._, challenge, duel.

desaforado, -a, disorderly, discordant, loud.

desagradable, disagreeable.

desalmado, -a, soulless, inhuman.

desaparecer, to disappear.

desarmar, to disarm, unload, discharge.

desarreglo, _m._, disorder, confusion, derangement.

desarrollarse, to unfold, be disclosed (_or_ developed).

desasido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desasir, detached, divested (of the body).

desasirse, to free (_or_ extricate) oneself.

desastroso, -a, disastrous.

desatar, to untie, unleash; _rfl._, to break loose.

desbandarse, to disband, scatter.

desbocado, -a, wild, unbridled, unrestrained.

descalzo, -a, barefoot.

descansar, to rest, repose, recover.

descargar, to unload, discharge, cast, direct.

descarnado, -a, fleshless, emaciated.

descender, to descend.

descifrar, to decipher, unravel.

descomponerse, to break up, fall apart.

descompuesto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ descomponer, altered, changed, harsh;
apart, in disorder.

desconfianza, _f._, distrust, suspicion, diffidence, fear.

desconocido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desconocer, unknown, foreign, strange,
unfamiliar.

descorrer, to draw (as a curtain).

descortés, uncivil, discourteous, rude.

describir, to describe.

descubrimiento, _m._, discovery.

descubrir, to lay bare, disclose, uncover, discover; _refl._, to
uncover oneself, take off one's hat (_or_ helmet); to appear, be
visible, be revealed.

descuidado, -a, careless.

descuido, _m._, carelessness; por --, from carelessness;
inadvertently; con --, carelessly.

desde, from, since, after, to, even to; -- donde, from where; -- que,
since; -- lejos, from a distance; -- luego, at once, straightway,
thereupon, immediately.

desdén, _m._, disdain, scorn.

desdeñoso, -a, disdainful.

desear, to desire, long for, wish.

desechar, to expel, drive away, exclude, dispel.

desembarazarse de, to free oneself of; to throw off.

desembocar, to terminate, open (en, into).

desembozarse, to uncover one's face, throw open one's cloak.

desempeñar, to drag (_or_ thrust) over; to perform, fulfill, fill.

desencadenado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desencadenar, unchained, wild.

desencajado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desencajar, disfigured, with distorted
features: (with eyes) unnaturally wide open, projecting, bulging,
staring.

desengañarse, to be undeceived, to undeceive oneself, not to deceive
oneself.

desenlace, _m._, catastrophe, dénouement.

desenredarse, to extricate oneself.

desenvolverse, to unfold.

deseo, _m._, desire.

desesperación, _f._, desperation, despair.

desesperado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desesperar, driven to despair,
desperate, in despair; _subst. m._, desperate man, one in despair.

desesperante, maddening.

desesperar, to drive to despair.

desfiladero, _m._, defile, pass.

desfilar, to defile, pass by, file past.

desgajar, to break (_or_ lop) off.

desgarrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desgarrar, rent, torn.

desgarrador, piercing, heartrending.

desgarrar, to rend, tear; _refl._, to tear, be torn.

desgracia, _f._, misfortune; por --, unfortunately.

deshacer, to destroy; to mutilate; _refl._, to dissolve, vanish, be
dissolved.

desheredar, to disinherit.

desierto, -a, deserted; _subst_ _m._, desert, waste.

designio, _m._, design, plan.

desigual, unequal, uneven, abrupt.

desistir, to desist, cease, abandon.

desligarse, to free oneself, get loose.

deslizarse, to glide, move slowly, slip through, pierce, go cautiously
(_or_ furtively), slide, flow, fall.

deslumbrador, dazzling, brilliant.

desmantelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desmantelar, dismantled, dilapidated.

desmayado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desmayar, depressed, dispirited,
drooping, pale, wan.

desmayar, to lose heart, be discouraged; _refl._, to faint, swoon.

desmentir, to contradict; to deny.

desnudar, to strip; to unsheathe; _refl._, to take off, strip oneself.

desnudo, -a, bare, naked, stripped.

desorden, _m._, disorder.

despacio, at leisure, leisurely, slowly, deliberately.

despacharse, to set out, make haste.

despacho, _m._, haste, dispatch.

desparecer, to disappear.

desparramarse, to scatter.

despavorido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ despavorir, terrified, in terror.

despecho, _m._, despair.

despedida, _f._, farewell.

despedir, to discharge, dispatch, emit; to take leave (á, of);
_refl._, to take leave, depart.

despegar, to open.

despeñadero, _m._, precipice.

despeñar, to hurl, fling, hurl over a precipice.

despertar, to arouse, awaken, awake, wake up; to break (of day);
_refl._, to awake, wake up.

despierto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ despertar, aroused, awake.

desplegar, to unfold, uncoil, open, display; _refl._, to display,
unfold.

desplomar, to fall; caer desplomado, to fall in a heap, fall flat;
_refl._, to fall, fall flat (_or_ in a heap).

despojar, to despoil, strip; _refl._, to strip oneself; to take off.

despojo, _m._, spoil; _pl._, spoils, remains, mortal remains.

despreciar, to scorn, despise.

desprecio, _m._, scorn, mockery.

desprenderse, to issue forth, be launched, be shed; to fall; to free
oneself, escape, depart.

desprendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desprender, unfastened; (of leaves)
loosened from the stem (_or_ frond); broken, separated.

despreocupación, _f._, unconventionality, recklessness.

despreocupado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ despreocupar, unprejudiced, liberal,
unconventional; reckless.

después, afterwards, later; since, then; --de, after; --que, after.

despuntar, to break; al --la mañana, at break of day; at dawn.

destacar, to detach, be detached, stand out (sobre, against); _refl._,
to stand out (sobre, against).

destapar, to uncover, uncork, open.

destartalado, -a, huddled (together), incompact, promiscuous, without
order.

destemplado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ destemplar, untuned, harsh, discordant.

destiuado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ destiuar, destined, designed, intended.

destinar, to destine, design.

destino, _m._, fate, destiny.

destrozar, to destroy.

destructor, -a, destructive.

desunir, to separate, sunder, disunite.

desvanecer, to cause to vanish; to clear up, unravel, dissipate; -- su
cabeza, to make one giddy, affect with dizziness, make one's head
swim; _refl._, to vanish, evaporate, disappear; to faint, fall
fainting.

desvanecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desvanecer, vanished; unconscious.

desvencijado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ desvencijar, broken, dilapidated.

detalle, _m._, detail.

detener, to hinder, restrain, stop, keep, detain; _refl._, to stop,
halt.

determinación, _f._, determination.

determinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ determinar, determined, resolved,
determinate, definite.

determinarse, to determine, resolve, decide, make up one's mind.

detestar, to detest.

detrás, after, behind; -- de, after; per --, behind; por -- de,
behind.

deudo, _m._, parent, relative.

devauar, to rack; -- se los sesos, to rack one's brains.

devoción, _f._, devotion, ardent love.

devolver, to return, restore.

devorar, to devour, absorb, consume.

devoto, -a, devout, pious; _subst. m._, devout (_or_ pious) person.

dia, _m._, day; al otro --, the next day; aún en el --, to this day;
de noche y --, night and day; en otros --s, in other (_or_ former)
days; formerly; un -- y otro, day after day; constantly.

diablo, _m._, devil, rascal, fellow.

diabólico, -a, diabolic.

diáfano, -a, diaphanous, transparent, pellucid.

diálogo, _m._, dialogue.

diamaute, _m._, diamond.

diantre, _m._, deuce; ¡qué --! the deuce! ¡(en) qué -- (_or_ --s)!
what the deuce!

dibujar, to draw, sketch; _refl._, to be drawn (_or_ sketched); to
appear.

diccionario, _m._, dictionary.

dicha, _f._, happiness, felicity, pleasure.

dichoso, -a, happy, fortunate.

diecinueve (more _commonly_ diez y nueve), nineteen.

diente, _m._, tooth; como que echó los --s en, he was, as it were,
born to (_or_ into); eutre --s, between (my) teeth; cantar entre --s,
to hum (a song).

diestro, _m._, halter, bridle; elevar del --, to lead by the halter
(_or_ bridle).

diez, ten; -- y nueve, nineteen.

diferencia, _f._, difference; _pl._, differences; quarrel,
disagreement.

dificil, difficult; que no será --, which it easily may.

dificultad, _f._, difficulty.

difunto, -a, defunct, deceased.

dignidad, _f._, dignity, self-respect.

digno, -a, worthy.

digresien, _f._, digression.

dilatacien, _f._, dilation, expansion.

dilatar, to dilate, expand, enlarge, spread (abroad); _refl._, to
dilate, spread out, expand, extend, swell.

diminuto, -a, diminutive, very small.

dinero, _m._, money.

dintel, _m._, lintel; threshold (_incorrect_ use).

Dionis, _m._, Dionysius, Dennis.

dios, _m._, god.

Dios, _m._, God; ¡--! Lord! Goodness! en -- y en mi ánima, in very
truth; God knows (that it is true); estar de --, to be God's will, to
be inevitable.

dirección, _f._, direction; con -- á, in the direction of.

dirigir, to direct, guide, cast; -- la palabra, to address, speak;
_refl._, to turn, face, be directed, direct one's steps, make one's
way, take one's course; to address (oneself).

dirimir, to adjust, settle.

discordante, discordant.

discorde, discordant.

discrete, -a, discreet.

disculpa, _f._, excuse, exculpation.

discurrir, to pass; to talk, discourse; to ramble, run about.

discurso, _m._, discourse, speech.

diseminar, to scatter; _refl._, to scatter, be scattered.

disensien, _f._, strife, dissension.

disforme, deformed, misshapen, monstrous.

disfrutar (de), to enjoy.

disgusto, _m._, disgust, ill humor, displeasure.

disimular, to dissemble, conceal, veil.

disipación, _f._, dissipation.

disipar, to dissipate, dispel, displace, cause to vanish; _refl._, to
vanish, scatter, be scattered (_or_ dispelled).

disolverse, to dissolve, separate, breakup.

disparar, to fire, shoot, discharge; al --la, upon firing (_or_
shooting) at it.

disparatado, -a, inconsistent, absurd.

dispersarse, to disperse, vanish, scatter.

disponer, to dispose, order, direct, arrange, prepare, get ready;
_refl._, to prepare, get ready, proceed, be about to; to be arranged
(_or_ projected).

disposición, _f._, disposition, arrangement, position, natural
fitness.

disputa, _f._, dispute.

disputar, to dispute, argue, quarrel; _refl._, to vie with one
another.

distancia, _f._, distance; como á -- de, something like a distance of;
at about the distance of; distant about.

distante, distant, remote.

distar, to be distant.

distinción, _f._, distinction, favor.

distinguir, to distinguish; _refl._, to be distinguished, be visible.

distintamente, distinctly.

distintivo, _m._, distinction, badge, order.

distinto, -a, distinct, different, various.

distraction, _f._, diversion, amusement.

distraer, to divert; _refl._, to divert (_or_ amuse) oneself.

distraido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ distraer, distraught, diverted,
absentminded, lost in thought, vacant.

diversiÓn, _f._, diversion, entertainment, sport, amusement.

diverso, -a, different, diverse, various.

divertido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ divertir, diverted, amused, pleasant.

divino, -a, divine.

divisar, to perceive, see, recognize, descry; to divide, separate;
_refl._, to be visible (at a distance).

divisorio, -a, dividing; línea divisoria, boundary.

divulgarse, to be divulged; to spread.

do (_poet._ for donde), where; á --, whither.

doblar, to double, pass round; to bow.

doble, double; más --, most double.

doce, twelve; al punto y hora de las --, exactly at midnight.

docena, _f._, dozen.

doctor, _m._, doctor, physician.

doler, to grieve; _refl._, to grieve.

doliente, sorrowful, plaintive.

dolor, _m._, grief, pain, sorrow, anguish.

domar, to break, tame, subdue, master, dominate, overcome.

dominar, to master, dominate, overcome, overlook, obtain a clear view
of.

domingo, _m._, Sunday.

dominio, _m._, possession, domain.

don, _m._, Don (a title used beforeChristian names of men).

donaciôn, _f._, donation, gift.

donaire, _m._, grace, courtesy.

doncel, _m._, youth, young nobleman.

doncella, _f._, girl, young lady, maid, maiden.

donde, where, in which; en --, in (_or_ on) which; hasta --, how far;
por --, where, through which; ¿Dónde va Vicente? Donde va la gente
(_lit._, "Where is Vincent going? Where the crowd goes"), it comes
easy to follow the crowd.

¿donde? where? ¿á --? whither? ¿de --? whence? doña, _f._, Lady,
mistress (a title used before Christian names of women).

dorado, -a, gilded, golden; brilliant.

dormido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ dormir, slept, sleeping, asleep.

dormir, to sleep, lie dormant; -- á pierna suielta, to sleep soundly
(_or_ deeply).

dos, two; los --, both.

doscientos, -as, two hundred.

dosel, _m._, canopy, dais.

dosis, _f._, dose.

dotar, to endow.

dragón, _m._, dragoon.

ducado, _m._, ducat (a gold coin of variable value).

duda, _f._, doubt, suspicion; sin --, doubtless.

dudar, to doubt, hesitate.

dudoso, -a, doubtful, uncertain, hazardous.

duelo, _m._, duel.

duelo, _m._, grief, mourning; funeral procession.

dueña, _f._, duenna, mistress, lady in waiting.

dueño, _m._, master, owner.

dulce, sweet, pleasant, soft, gentle, mild.

dulcisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ dulce, very (_or_ most) sweet (soft
_or_ gentle).

dulzura, _f._, sweetness, gentleness.

duque, _m._, duke.

durante, during, for.

durar, to last, continue.

duro, -a, hard; á duras penas, with great difficulty; _subst. m._,
dollar.


E


é, and (_before_ i- and hi-).

ébano, _m._, ebony.

ebrio, -a, drunken, intoxicated, drunk.

eco, _m._, echo.

echado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ echar, thrown, cast; lying.

echar, to throw, cast, put, place, utter, dismiss, put out; -- la
bendición, to give the benediction; -- á broma, to take (_or_
consider) as a joke (_or_ jest); -- en busca, to go (_or_ set off) in
search; -se algo al coleto, to swallow at a gulp; -- los dientes, to
cut one's teeth; como que echó los dientes en, he was, as it were,
born to (_or_ into); -- el guante, to arrest; hasta -- los higados,
with all (your) might; -- mano de, to lay hands upon, take possession
of; -- pestes de, to storm at; -- pie á tierra, to get down, dismount;
-- en saco roto, to be heedless of; not to take advantage of; to
forget; -- un trago, to have a drink, take a dram.

edad, _f._, age.

edificio, _m._, edifice, building.

efectivamente, indeed, in fact, in reality, effectually.

efecto, _m._, result, effect; en --, in fact, indeed.

efluvio, _m._, effluvium, exhalation, emanation.

efusión, _f._, effusion, tenderness.

egoísmo, _m._, selfishness, egoism.

¡eh! eh! say!

eje, _m._, axis, axle.

ejemplar, exemplary; _subst. m._, example; sin --, unprecedented.

ejemplo, _m._, example.

ejercicio, _m._, exercise, practice.

ejercitar, to exercise, drill, train.

ejército, _m._, army, array.

el, la, lo, the.

él, ella, ello, he, him, she, her, it.

él, la, lo, that.

elaborar, to elaborate, develop, unfold.

elargar, to stretch out, raise.

elegante, elegant, fine, graceful.

elegir, to elect, choose.

elemento, _m._, element.

elevado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ elevar, elevated, lofty.

elevar, to elevate, raise, lift up; _refl._, to arise, rise up.

Elvira, _f._, Elvira.

ella, she, her, it.

ello, it; -- es que, the fact is.

embargar, to hold in subjection, restrain, control.

embargo, _m._, hindrance; sin --, nevertheless, however,
notwithstanding.

embebecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ embebecer, enraptured.

embellecer, to embellish, adorn.

emblema, _m._, emblem.

embocadura, _f._, mouth, entrance.

emboscada, _f._, ambuscade.

emboscarse, to lie in ambush.

embozado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ embozar, wrapped (_or_ muffled) up;
disguised, covert.

embozar, to muffle the greater part of one's face.

embriagar, to intoxicate, delight, transport; _reft._, to become
intoxicated, get drunk.

embriaguez, _f._, intoxication, stupor, torpor.

embrollo, _m._, intrigue, liaison.

embrujar, to charm, bewitch.

emisario, _m._, emissary.

emoción, _f._, emotion.

empellón, _m._, push, shove, shoving, blow.

empeñarse, to endeavor, persist in.

empeño, _m._, aim, purpose, desire, eagerness; tener --, to desire
earnestly.

empequeñecerse, to be (_or_ become) small.

emperador, _m._, emperor.

empero, however.

empezar, to begin.

empinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ empinar, raised, elevated, lofty, steep.

empinarse, to raise oneself; to rise.

emplear, to employ, make use of.

emponzoñar, to poison.

emprender, to undertake, take, take up, set out on.

empresa, _f._, enterprise, activity, undertaking.

empujar, to drive, impel, force along, push, stir.

empujón, _m._, push, violent shove.

empuñadura, _f._, hilt.

en, in, on, to, upon, at, into; as (a); -- contra mía, against myself;
against my interests; -- cuanto, as soon as, when; -- cuanto ó, as to,
as for, as regards; -- pos de, after, behind, in pursuit of; -- lo
posible, as much as possible; -- tanto que, while; -- torno, round
about; -- torno de, about, around.

enamorado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enamorar, enamored, in love, loving,
tender, lovesick; _subst. m._, lover.

encadenar, to chain, bind.

encajarse, to join, be united, come together.

encaje, _m._, lace.

encaminarse, to proceed, take the road, betake oneself.

encanijar, to weaken, cause to pine away.

encantar, to delight, enchant, charm.

encanto, _m._, enchantment, charm, spell.

encapotar, to cloak, muffle.

encaramarse, to climb.

encarar, to aim; -- se con, to face, confront.

encarcelar, to imprison.

encargar, to charge, recommend.

encenagar, to mire; to trouble, disturb.

encender, to kindle, light; _refl._, to be kindled.

encendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encender, lighted, inflamed, burning,
glowing, aflame, aglow, blazing, passionate.

encerrar, to confine, imprison, enclose, embody; _refl._, to shut
oneself up, seclude onself, retire.

encima, upon; -- de, upon, on top of; por -- de, over, above.

encina, _f._, evergreen oak.

enclavar, to nail.

encoger, to shrug; _refl._, to draw back, shrink.

encogido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encoger, contracted, shrinking.

encogimiento, _m._, timidity.

encomendar, to recommend, commit.

encomienda, _f._, badge, the embroidered cross worn by knights of
military orders.

encontrar, to meet, find, encounter, see, reach; _refl._, to meet each
other (_or_ one another); to be found, be met with; to be; to meet,
join.

encorvado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encorvar, bent, crooked.

encubierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ encubrir, covered, concealed, veiled,
hidden.

encubrir, to cover, veil, conceal.

encuentro, _m._, meeting, encounter; á su --, to meet him (her, you,
_or_ them).

enderezarse, to enter, plunge into.

endiablado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ endiablar, corrupted, devilish, vile,
diabolical.

endriago, _m._, monster, dragon.

enebro, _m._, juniper, common juniper.

enemigo, -a, hostile, inimical; _subst. m._, enemy.

enérgico, -a, energetic.

enfermo, -a, sick, ill.

engañarse, to be mistaken.

engañoso, -a, deceitful, deceptive.

engarzar, to enchase, encircle, set.

engendrar, to produce, engender.

engendro, _m._, offspring.

engolfar, to engross, engage, occupy.

engreído, -a, _adj. pp. of_ engreir, elated, lofty, haughty.

enigma, _m._, enigma.

enigmático, -a, enigmatical.

enjaezado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enjaezar, caparisoned.

enjambre, _m._, swarm.

enjugar, to dry, wipe away.

enlutado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enlutar, in mourning.

enmarañado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ enmarañar, entangled, perplexing,
confusing, intricate.

enmudecer, to be (_or_ become) silent.

ennegrecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ennegrecer, blackened, black, burnt.

enojoso, -a, vexing, disturbing.

enorme, enormous, mighty.

enredar, to become entangled; to catch, entangle, entwine, coil
_refl._, to entwine (around); to entangle oneself, become entangled
(_or_ ensnared); to coil.

enrojecer, to redden, heat red-hot; _refl._, to become red-hot.

enroscarse, to twist, curl, coil, writhe.

ensancharse, to widen, broaden.

ensangrentar, to stain with blood, be blood-stained.

ensayar, to practice.

enseñar, to teach.

ensordecer, to deafen.

ensueño, _m._, sleep, dream.

entender, to understand; como Dios me daba á --, to the best of my
ability.

enteramente, entirely, quite, just, right.

enterarse, to inform oneself.

entero, -a, entire, whole.

enterrar, to inter, bury.

entonar, to sing, begin singing.

entonces, then; -- que ..., then, while ...; then, when ...

entornar, to turn; to close.

entrada, _f._, entrance.

entrañas, _f._ _pl._, entrails, heart.

entrar, to enter, come, arrive; á to begin; _refl._, (of the night) to
come on; to fall; como se les enttase á más andar el día, as the day
went on; as the day passed (for them).

entre, between, among, in; por --, between, among, in, through;
mirarse -- sé, to look at each other (_or_ one another); sí, to
himself, etc.

entreabierto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entreabrir, half opened, ajar, gaping.

entreabrir, to open slightly.

entrecortado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entrecortar, interrupted, broken,
broken.

entregado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ entregar, given over, devoted.

entregarse, to yield, give way, give oneself over (up. up), abandon
oneself.

entrelazar, to interlace, intertwine.

entremezclar, to intermingle.

entretener, to keep (in order); to entertain, divert; _refl._, to
delay, tarry, amuse oneself.

entrever, to get a glimpse of; dejar --, to show slightly.

entrevista, _f._, interview, meeting.

enturbiar, to disturb, trouble.

entusiasmo, _m._, enthusiasm.

envejecer, to grow old.

enviar, to send.

envidioso, -a, envious, invidious.

envilecer, to debase, debauch.

envio, _m._, remittance.

envolver, to envelop.

enzarzarse, to be (_or_ become) entangled (as among brambles or
briars).

epidermis, _f._, epidermis.

epigrama, _m._, epigram.

época, _f_, period, epoch, time.

equivaler, to be equal to, be worth, be equivalent to.

equivocadamente, inadvertently, by mistake.

eremita, _m._, hermit.

erguirse, to straighten up; to rise.

erizado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ erizar, bristling (de, with).

erizar, to cause to stand on end; to bristle; _refl._, to stand on
end; to bristle.

ermita, _f._, hermitage.

ermitaño, _m._, hermit.

errante, wandering, rambling, roving.

esbelto, -a, tall, slender.

escabel, _m._, seat, stool; pedestal; resting-place.

escala, _f._, ladder.

escalador, _m._, scaler, one who scales walls.

escalar, to scale, climb.

escalera, _f._, stairs, staircase.

escalinata, _f._, steps.

escalón, _m._, step, jut, projection.

escandaloso, -a, scandalous, disgraceful, opprobrious.

escaño, _m._, bench, chair.

escapar, to escape, fall; _refl._, to escape, fall.

escape, _m._, flight, speed; á (or al) --, at full speed; á todo --,
at full speed.

escapulario, _m._, scapular.

escarabajo, _m._, scarab.

escarcha, _f._, hoar-frost, frost.

escasear, to give sparingly (_or_ grudgingly).

escaso, -a, slight, scanty.

escena, _f._, scene.

esclarecimiento, _m._, dawn.

escoger, to choose, select.

escogido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ escoger, chosen, select, choice, fine.

escombros, _m. pl._, debris, rubbish.

esconder, to hide, cover up; _refl._, to hide, be concealed; (of the
sun) to set; to disappear.

escondido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ esconder, concealed, hidden, secret.

escondite, _m._, concealment, retreat, hiding-place.

escondrijo, _m._, concealment, hiding-place, retreat.

escribir, to write.

escrito, -a, _adj. pp. of_ escribir, written; _subst. m._, writing,
work.

escuadra, _f._, squadron.

escuáilido, -a, weak, miserable.

escuchar, to listen, listen to, hear; _refl._, to be heard, be
audible.

escudero, _m._, squire.

escudo, _m._, shield, buckler; escutcheon.

escudriñar, to search, examine, scrutinize.

escueto, -a, free, open.

esculpir, to sculpture, carve.

escultor, _m._, sculptor.

escultura, _f._, sculpture, statue.

ese, esa, that.

ése, ésa, eso, that one, that; ésa, your city (the city where you are
staying).

esforzar, to reënforce, support, help on, applaud; _refl._, to make an
effort; to exert oneself.

esfuerzo, _m._, effort, exertion.

esmeralda, _f._, emerald.

eso, that; por --, for that reason; hence, therefore; ¿que es --? what
is it? what is the matter?

espacio, _m._, space; _pl._, space.

espacioso, -a, spacious.

espada, _f._, sword.

espadaiia, _f._, spire, tower; campanario de --, single-walled
belltower; belfry of a single wall with openings for the bells.

espalda, _f._, back; _pl._, shoulders, back; á mis --s, behind me;
vuelto de --s, with (his) back turned.

espaldar, _m._, backplate (of a cuirass).

espantado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ espantar, frightened, terrified,
astonished, wondering, in terror (_or_ astonishment).

espantoso, -a, frightful, dreadful, horrible.

español, -a, Spanish.

especial, special, peculiar, particular, uncommon.

especialmente, especially, particularly.

especie, _f._, kind.

espectáculo, _m._, spectacle.

espectador, _m._, spectator.

espejo, _m._, mirror.

esperanza, _f._, hope, expectation.

esperar, to hope, expect, wait for, await, wait; _refl._, to expect.

espesisimo, -a, _abs. super._ of espeso, very (_or_ most) dense.

espeso, -a, dense.

espesura, _f._, thicket, wilderness.

espiral, _f._, spiral.

espíritu, _m._, spirit, mind, heart, soul.

espiritual, spiritual; spiritualized; unworldly; ethereal.

esplendor, _m._, splendor.

espontáneamente, spontaneously.

espontáneo, -a, spontaneous.

esposa, _f._, wife

espuela, _f._, spur.

espuma, _f._, foam, froth.

espumoso, -a, sparkling, effervescent.

esqueleto, _m._, skeleton, corpse.

esquililla, _f._, small bell, sheep bell.

esquilón, _f._, bell, church bell.

esquina, _f._, corner, angle.

esquivar, to avoid, evade.

ésta. See éste.

estacionarse, to station oneself, take up a position.

estado, _m._, state, condition, rank.

estancarse, to stop, fall.

estar, to be; -- de Dios, to be God's will, to be inevitable; para, to
be about to; -- á punto, to be ready; to be on the point of, be about
to; -- viendolo, to see it; to be present; estuve oyendo, I kept
hearing.

estatua, _f._, statue.

este, esta, this.

éste, ésta, esto, this one, this, the latter; á éste quiero á éste no
quiero, without asking permission; without choice; willy-nilly.

Esteban, _m._, Stephen.

estela, _f._, wake, track, streak.

estéril, sterile, barren.

esto, this;--es, that is; namely; de la solfa, the art of music.

estómago, _m._, stomach.

estoque, _m._, sword, rapier.

estrado, _m._, platform (on which the royal throne is placed).

estrambótico, -a, strange, odd, queer, eccentric.

estratégico, -a, strategic.

estrechar, to press, clasp, constrain.

estrecho, -a, narrow, close.

estrella, _f._, star.

estremecer, to shake, make shudder, cause to tremble; _refl._, to
tremble, start, quiver, be startled, vibrate, shiver; (of the flesh)
to creep.

estremecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ estremecer, shaken, trembling,
quivering.

estremecimiento, _m._, trembling, start, shiver.

estrépito, _m._, noise, clamor.

estrepitoso, -a, noisy, boisterous.

estribo, _m._, stirrup.

estridente, strident, shrill, harsh.

estruendo, _m._, noise, rumor.

estruendoso, -a, noisy, clamorous.

estrujar, to press, clasp.

estudiante, _m._, student.

estudiar, to study.

estupendo, -a, wonderful, stupendous, marvelous.

esthpido, -a, stupid, dull, dazed.

estupor, _m._, stupor, torpor, amazement.

éter, _m._, ether.

eternamente, eternally.

eternidad, _f._, eternity.

eterno, -a, eternal, everlasting, endless.

Evangelio, _m._, Gospel; _pl._, Gospels; buenos --s, some holy
sayings; some of the Holy Scriptures.

evaporarse, to evaporate, vanish.

evasivo, -a, evasive.

evitar, to avoid, escape.

evolución, _f._, evolution, change.

exabrupto, _m._, outburst, excess, violence, abruptness, abrupt (_or_
unexpected) remark.

exagerar, to exaggerate.

exaltación, _f._, exaltation, sublimity; exaggeration, fanaticism,
imagination, mere fancy.

examinar, to examine.

exasperar, to exasperate.

exceder, to exceed, surpass.

excepto, except.

exclamación, _f._, exclamation.

exclamar, to exclaim.

exclusive, -a, exclusive.

excursión, _f._, expedition, incursion, raid.

excusar, to excuse, exempt, release, spare.

exhalación, _f._, exhalation; (_here_) flash of lightning.

exhalar, to exhale.

existencia, _f._, existence.

existir, to exist, live.

expedición, _f._, expedition, journey.

experimentar, to experience, feel.

expiación, _f._, expiation.

expiar, to expiate, atone.

expirar, to expire, vanish, die away.

explicación, _f._, explanation, explanatory remark.

explicar, to explain; _refl._, to express oneself.

explosión, _f._, explosion, burst.

exponerse, to expose oneself, be exposed, run the risk.

expresar, to express.

expresión, _f._, expression; _pl._, regards.

exquisito, -a, exquisite, extreme, perfect, supreme.

éxtasis, _m._, ecstasy.

extender, to stretch out, extend, lengthen; _refl._, to spread.

extenso, -a, vast.

extraño, -a, strange.

extraordinario, -a, extraordinary.

extravagancia, _f._, extravagance, madness.

extravagante, wild, extravagant, odd, strange.

extraviado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ extraviar, distracted, bewildered, wild,
wandering, roving.

extravío, _m._, disorder, irregularity.

extremidad, _f._, extremity.

extremo,_m._, end, extremity, limit, corner, angle.


F


fábula, _f._, rumor, story, fable, fiction, idle tale; composition,
plot.

fabuloso, -a, fabulous.

facciones,_f. pl._, features.

faceta, _f._, facet, surface.

fácil, easy.

faja, _f._, band, sash, belt.

falda,_f._, slope; skirt, lap.

falta, _f._, fault, lack, want.

faltar, to fail, lack, need, be lacking (_or_ wanting); -- por hacer,
to remain to be done.

falto, -a, lacking; -- de sentido, unconscious.

fama, _f._, report, rumor.

familia,_f._, family.

familiar, _m._, servant, attendant; _pl._, retinue, suite.

familiarizado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ familiarizar, familiarized, familiar,
acquainted, accustomed.

famoso, -a, famous, celebrated, notorious.

fango, _m._, mire.

fantasia, _f._, fancy, imagination.

fantasma, _m._, phantom; _f._, scarecrow.

fantasmagoria, _f._, phantasmagoria.

fantástico, -a, fantastic.

farol, _m._, lantern.

farolillo, _m._, small lantern.

farsante, _m._, claimant, pretender.

fascinador, fascinating.

fascinar, to fascinate, charm.

fastidiarse, to be bored.

fatiga, _f._, fatigue, toil, labor, hardship.

fatigado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ fatigar, tired, fatigued.

fatigar, to tire, weary, fatigue.

fatigoso, -a, exhausting.

fatuos: fuegos --, ignis fatuus; will-o'-the-wisp.

fauces, _f. pl._, jaws.

fausto, _m._, splendor, pomp, luxury.

favor, _m._, favor, kindness; en -- de, in behalf of; to favor.

favorecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ favorecer, favored, in favor.

favorite, -a, favorite.

faz, _f._, face.

fe, _f._, faith, belief; á -- de quien soy, on my honor; on the word
of a gentleman; á -- á -- que, upon my word; I give you my word; in
truth; por mi --, on my word; auto de --, public burning by the
Inquisition; (hence) great fire, bonfire, fire.

febril, feverish.

fecundo, -a, fertile.

fechorla, _f._, act, deed, evil deed.

felicidad, _f._, felicity, bliss.

feliz, happy, blissful.

fenómeno, _m._, phenomenon, manifestation.

féretro, _m._, bier, coffin.

feria, _f._, fair.

Fernando, _m._, Ferdinand.

ferocidad, _f._, ferocity; _pl._, ferocity.

feroz, ferocious.

ferrar, to garnish with points of iron; to strengthen with iron
plates.

férreo, -a, iron, of (_or_ pertaining to) iron.

festín, _m._, feast, banquet, festival.

festón, _m._, festoon, garland.

feudal, feudal.

feudo, _m._, fief, feud.

fibra, _f._, fiber.

fiebre, _f._, fever.

fiel, faithful, loyal.

fieltro, _m._, felt; hat.

fiera, _f._, wild beast.

fiesta, _f._, feast, festival, fête, festivity.

figura, _f._, figure, form.

figurar, to imagine; _refl._, to imagine, fancy; to appear in fancy;
se me figuran, appear to my fancy.

fijamente, fixedly.

fijar, to fix, fasten; _refl._, to be fixed; to look fixedly.

fijo, -a, fixed.

fila, _f._, file, rank, line, row.

filigrana, _f._, filigree.

filo, _m._, edge; allá al -- de la media noche, just about midnight.

fin, _m._, end; al --, finally; á -- de, in order to; dar --, to die,
perish; en --, in fine, finally, in short, after all, anyhow, well;
por --, finally.

final, _m._, end, conclusion.

fingir, to feign, pretend, simulate, counterfeit, take the form of,
affect, assume, imitate, seem to be.

finura, _f._, charm, finesse. firme, firm; de --, firmly, forcibly,
lustily.

fisico, -a, physical; _subst. m._, physique, physical organization
(being _or_ make-up)

flamencote, _m._, big Fleming.

flanquear, to flank, flag, falter, grow feeble.

flexible, flexible, supple, soft.

flor, _f._, flower; dar en la --, to take into one's head; to fall
into the habit.

floral, floral.

florido, -a, elegant, select.

flotante, floating, waving.

flotar, to float, wave, hover.

flúido, _m._, fluid.

foco, _m._, focus; center.

fogata, _f._, blaze, fire.

fogoso, -a, fiery, spirited.

follaje, _m._, foliage. fondo, _m._, back, rear, background, depth,
heart, recess, bottom.

forcejear, to struggle, writhe.

forma, _f._, form, figure, shape, host; _pl._, form, figure; Sagrada
Forma, Consecrated Host.

formar, to form.

formidable, formidable, dreadful.

fórmula, _f._, formula, charm, recipe.

formular, to formulate, speak.

fornido, -a, robust, lusty, stout.

forraje, _m._, forage, hay, grass.

fortaleza, _f._, fortress, stronghold.

fortuna, _f._, fortune; por --, fortunately.

fosa, _f._, ditch, grave.

fosfórico, -a, phosphorescent.

foso, _m._, ditch, moat.

fragmento, _m._, fragment, piece, bowlder.

fragoso, -a, craggy, rough, uneven.

fraguarse, to break; to be forged (invented _or_ gotten up).

fraile, _m._, friar.

francamente, frankly.

franqueza, _f._, frankness.

frase, _f._, phrase, speech, word, words; --s enamoradas, tender
(loving _or_ lovesick) phrases (_or_ words).

fratricida, fratricidal.

frecuente, frequent.

fregona, _f._, kitchen-maid, scrubbing-girl.

freir, to fry; _refl._, to fry.

freno, _m._, restraint, bounds.

frente, _f._, brow, forehead, face, head; -- á, facing; in front of.

fresco, -a, fresh, cool.

frescura, _f._, freshness.

frio, -a, cold; _subst. m._, cold; hacer --, to be cold.

friolera, _f._, trifle, mere trifle; ¡--! nonsense!

fronda, _f._, frond, leaf.

frondoso, -a, leafy, covered with leaves, luxuriant, shady.

frontera, _f._, frontier.

frugal, frugal.

frustrar, to frustrate.

fruta, _f._, fruit.

fuego, _m._, fire; poner --, to set fire (to); --s fatuos, ignis
fatuus; will-o'-the-wisp.

fuelles, _m. pl._, bellows (of an organ); para darle á los --, to pump
the bellows.

fuente, _f._, fountain, source.

fuer, á -- de, as, like, being, by dint of being, since you are (_or_
were).

fuera, out; -- de, outside of, beyond, beside; -- de sí, beside
oneself.

fuerte, strong, mighty, violent.

fuertemente, strongly, firmly.

fuerza, _f._, force, power, might; body of troops; á -- de, by dint
of; -- le sera, he will have to; he will be forced.

fugaz, fleeting, fugitive.

fugitivo, -a, fleeting, fugitive.

fulgor, _m._, gleam, glow, flash, brilliancy, effulgence.

función, _m._, ceremony, solemnity.

fundado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ fundar, grounded in the belief; taking (it)
for granted; believing.

fundar, to found, ground.

fundir, to melt.

funesto, -a, baleful, fatal.

furia, _f._, fury; estar hecho una --, to be in a rage.

furioso, -a, furious.

furtivo, -a, furtive, clandestine, fleeting; cazadores --s, poachers.

futuro, -a, future.


G


gabinete, _m._, cabinet; correo de --, state (_or_ king's) messenger.

gaita, _f._, bagpipe.

gala, _f._, ostentation, display, grace, adornment; full (_or_ court)
dress; _pl._, regalia, finery, paraphernalia.

galán. _m._, gallant, lover, suitor, wooer.

galante, gallant; of (_or_ pertaining to) lovers.

galantería, _f._, gallantry, courteousness, courtliness.

galanura, _f._, grace, gracefulness, elegance (in language _or_
style), style, repartee.

Galatea, _f._, Galatea.

galeón, _m._, galleon.

galería, _f._, gallery.

galonear, to adorn (_or_ deck) with lace.

gallardía, _f._, gallantry.

gallo, _m._, cock, rooster; Misa del Gallo, midnight mass on Christmas
eve.

gamo, _m._, buck.

gana, _f._, appetite, desire, wish, inclination; tener --s, to have a
mind (de, to).

ganado, _m._, flock, herd.

ganar, to gain.

ganga, _f._, (_coll._) fortune, luck, anything valuable acquired with
little labor.

Garcés, _m._, (_Span._} Garcts.

garganta, _f._, throat.

garra, _f._, claw.

garrotazo, _m._, blow with a staff (_or_ cudgel).

garrote, _m._, cudgel, stick, staff.

gasa, _f._, gauze.

gastar, to spend; to display; como las gasta, how he acts; how he
comports himself; what his tricks are.

gato, _m._, cat.

gavilanes, _m. pl._, cross-bars of the guard of a sword; guard (of a
sword-hilt).

gavilla, _f._, band, gang.

gay saber, _m._, poetry, art of poetry.

gemido, _m._, sigh, groan, moan, moaning, sighing.

gemir, to moan, sigh, groan; to creak.

general, general; _subst. m._, general.

género, _m._, kind, species, quality, nature.

generoso, -a, generous.

genial, _m._, disposition, nature.

genio, _m._, genius, spirit.

gente, _f._, people, crowd, servants; _pl._, servants; -- menuda,
servants, domestics, dependents; -- del pueblo, common people.

Gerardo, _m._, Gerard.

gerifalte, _m._, falcon, gyrfalcon.

germinar, to germinate, bud.

gigante, gigantic, grand.

gigantesco, -a, gigantic, vast.

girar, to turn, revolve, dart about; to creak.

girón, _m._, piece, tatter, banner, pennant, flag.

gitana, _f._, gypsy.

glacial, glacial, icy.

globo, _m._, globe, sphere, ball.

gloria, _f._, glory; el día de --, the day of glory, Holy Saturday.

goce, _m._, enjoyment, pleasure.

gola, _f._, gorget, neck-plate.

golondrina, _f._, swallow.

golpe, _m._, stroke, blow, clang, clank; á --s, by (_or_ with) blows.

golpear, to strike, beat; _subst. m._, clattering.

gordo, -a, large, big, great, coarse.

gorguera, _f_, ruff; -- de cañutos, fluted ruff.

gorjear, to warble.

gota, _f._, drop; -- á --, drop by drop.

gotear, to drop, drip, fall drop by drop.

gótico, -a, Gothic.

gozar, to enjoy; -- de, to enjoy.

gozne, _m._, hinge.

gozo, _m._, joy, pleasure, satisfaction.

grabar, to engrave.

gracia, _f._, grace, favor, charm; _pl._, thanks; dar las --s, to
express one's thanks.

gracioso, -a, funny, comical.

grada, _f._, step, stair, gradine; _pl._, perron, staircase.

grado, _m._, grade, rank, degree.

gradualmente, gradually.

grama, _f._, dog-grass, dog-wheat.

gran. See grande.

grana, _f._, scarlet; (fine) scarlet cloth; de --, scarlet.

grande, great, grand, large, tall, long; á --s voces, in a loud voice,
loudly.

granito, _m._, granite.

granjear, to obtain, gain, win.

grano, _m._, gram.

grave, serious, dignified, grave.

gravedad, _f._, gravity, seriousness.

graznido, _m._, croaking, cawing.

greña, _f._, tangled (_or_ matted) hair.

griego, -a, Greek.

grifo, _m._, griffin, a fabulous monster, half lion, half eagle.

gris, gray.

gritar, to cry (out).

grito, _m._, cry; -- de vela, watch-cry.

groseramente, roughly, rudely, coarsely.

grotesco, -a, grotesque.

grueso, -a, thick, large, big, bulky; _subst. m._, large body, main
body.

grupa, _f._, croup; volver --s; to turn back (_or_ around).

grupo, _m._, group.

guante, _m._, glove; echar el --, to arrest.

guantelete, _m._, gauntlet.

guarda, _m._, guard.

guardar, to retain, keep, possess, have, guard; to stow away.

guardia, _f._, guard; en --, on guard.

guardián, _m._, keeper, warden.

guarecerse, to take refuge, find shelter, escape.

guarida, _f._, cave, cavern, den, lair.

guedeja, _f._, lock (of hair).

guerra, _f._, war.

guerrero, _m._, warrior, soldier.

guía, _m._, guide.

guiar, to guide.

guijarro, _m._, pebble.

guión, _m._, bell-wether, bell-sheep.

guisa, _f._, manner, guise; á -- de, by way of.

gusano, _m._, worm, maggot.

gustar, to like, please.

gusto, _m._, taste, pleasure, ease, leisure; dar --, to gratify.

guzla, _f._, guzla, fiddle with a single string.


H


ha, _contraction of_ hace. See hacer.

haber, to have; -- de, to have to, be obliged to; must, should, would,
ought; to be to, be able to; can; he de, I must; había de, I was to; I
had to; no se ha de decir, it cannot be said; que se ha de comer la
tierra, which the earth shall (one day) swallow up; ¿y por qué no has
de vivir? and why can you not (_or_ should you not) live? --
(_impers._), to be; hay, there is (_or_ are); habia, there was (_or_
were); habrá, there will be; -- que, to be necessary; me lo habían de
asegurar ... y no lo creeria, even if I were assured by ... I wouldn't
believe it; que habréis visto, which you probably have seen; ¿que hay?
what is it? what is the matter? si no hay más que, one needs only to;
no hay para qué decir que se fastidiaban, it is needless to say were
bored; no haya cuidado, don't worry, never fear, let there be no fear;
que no haya más que oir, that nothing else can be heard; he aquí, here
is (_or_ are); behold, lo.

habilitar, to provide, equip, furnish.

habitación, _f._, hall, room.

habitador, _m._, inhabitant, tenant.

habitar, to live, dwell, inhabit, reside.

hábito, _m._, habit, custom; dress; _pl._, cassock, clothes.

habitual, habitual.

hablar, to speak; en hablando del ruin de Roma, cátale aqui que asoma,
speak of the devil and he will appear.

hablilla, _f._, rumor, report, babbling.

hacer, to make, do, cause, bring about, work, cast, be, become, be
turned into; --(_impers._), to be (of the weather and of time); hace,
ago; hace mucho tiempo, a long time ago; no hace (_or_ ha) mucho, not
long ago; hace muchos años, many years ago; hace rato, quite a while
ago; hará cosa de tres ó cuatro días, about three or four days ago;
haria cosa de unas dos horas, it must have been about two hours; --
justicia, to execute; -- mal de ojo, to cast the evil eye; -- memoria
de, to remember; -- monos, to play tricks; -- pedazos, to break to
pieces; -- platillo de, to converse about; -- una pregunta, to ask a
question, make a request; -- presente, to lay before, present, state;
dar que --, to give trouble; estar hecbo una furia, to be in a rage;
_refl._, to be, become; -- se de tripas corazón, to pluck up courage.

hacia, towards; -- adelante, forward.

hacha, _f._, torch.

hada, _f._, fairy; enchanted nymph.

halagar, to flatter, caress.

halagüeño, -a, attractive, alluring.

halcón, _m._, falcon.

hallar, to find, meet; _refl._, to be, be found, meet.

hambre, _f._, hunger.

harapo, _m._, tatter, rag, fringe.

haraposo, -a, ragged.

hasta, as far as, up to, until, to, towards, also, besides, even, even
to; -- entonces, till then; ¡-- la noche! (good-by) till tonight; no
... --, only; not before; -- que (no), until; -- tonto que, until;
-- unos cien, (up to) about a hundred.

haz, _m._, bundle; el -- de armas, panoply.

haz, _f._, face, surface.

haza, _f._, field, cultivated field.

he: -- aquf, here is (_or_ are); behold; héte aqui, hare is (_or_
are); behold.

hechicera, _f._, witch, hag.

hechizar, to bewitch.

hechizo, _m._, enchantment, charm.

hecho, -a, _pp. of_ hacer, made, turn (formed _or_ turned) into; like;
_subst. m._, fact, deed, act, event.

hediondo, -a, fetid, fould.

helado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ helar, frozen, icy, glacial.

helar, to freeze.

henchir(se), to swell.

hendidura, _f._, fissure, crack, crevice.

heredad, _f._, country place, farm.

heredar, to inherit.

herencia, _f._, inheritance.

herida, _f._, wound.

herido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ herir, wounded; á voz herida, in clanging
tones.

herir, to strike, wound, shine upon, light up; -- de muerte, to
strike dead.

hermana, _f._, sister.

hermano, _m._, brother.

hermoso, -a, lovely, beautiful, fine.

hermosote, very fine (or handsome).

hermosure, _f._, beauty.

héroe, _m._, hero.

hervir, to boil, blaze, seethe; to crowd, swarm.

héte. See he.

hiedra, _f._, ivy.

hielo, _m._, ice, frost.

hierba, _f._, grass, herb; _pl._, grass.

hierro, _m._, iron; _pl._, irons, fetters; arms; hundir una cuarta de
--, to bury the spurs; to spur deeply.

higado, _m._, liver; hasta echar los --s, with all (your) might.

hija, _f._, doughter, girl, child, offspring.

hijo, _m._, son; _pl._, children.

hilo, _m._, thread, ray.

hilvanar, to prepare; to plan.

himno, _m._, hymn.

hinchado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ hinchar, swollen.

hinojo, _m._, knee; de --s, kneeling; on one's knees.

hipocritón, very hypocritical; _subst. m._, great hypocrite.

hirviente, boiling, glowing, blazing.

hisopo, _m._, aspergill, brush used to sprinkle holy water.

historia _f._, story, incident.

histórico, -a, historic, historical.

hito, _m._, mark; mirar de -- en --, to look at (_or_ over) closely,
view with attention, fix one's eyes upon.

hogar, _m._, hearth, home, fireplace.

hoguera, _f._, fire, bonfire, blaze.

hoja, _f._, leaf, fold, blade; _pl._, double doors, folding doors.

hojarasca, _f._, foliage; (_here_) carved foliage.

¡hola! halloo! look! well! what!

hollar, to tread upon, trample.

hombre, _m._, man.

hombro, _m._, shoulder; en --s, on (their) shoulders.

homenaje,_m.._, homage; prestar --, to pay homage, profess fealty;
torre del --, tower of homage; homage tower; tower in a castle in
which the governor or warden took the oath of fidelity.

honda, _f._, sling; tiro de--, slingshot.

hondo, -a, profound, deep.

hondura, _f._, depth, cavity, basin, deep valley.

honor, _m._, honor.

honra, _f._, honor.

honrado, -a, honest, honorable.

hora, _f._, hour; o'clock; á --, at an hour; á la media --, within
half an hour; y esta es la -- en que todavía no le hemos visto, and we
haven't seen him since; al punto y -- de, on the stroke of, at
exactly.

horca, _f._, gallows.

horizonte, _m._, horizon.

hornacina, _f._, vaulted niche, niche.

horrible, horrible, fearful.

horror, _m._, horror, dread; santo --, awe, reverential fear.

horroroso, -a, horrid, hideous.

hostia, _f._, host.

hoy, to-day.

hucco, -a, hollow, cavernous; _subst. m._, hollow, hole, niche,
cavity, grave.

huella, _f._, impression, trace, track, print, footprint.

hueso, _m._, bone; _pl._, bones, remains; de carne y --, of flesh and
blood.

huesoso, -a, bony.

huésped, _m._, guest.

hueste, _f._, host, army.

huesudo, -a, bony.

huída, _f._, flight, escape.

huir, to flee, flee from, escape.

humanidad, _f._, humanity.

humano, -a, human, mortal.

humear, to smoke, smolder, steam.

humedecer, to moisten, dampen, steep.

húmedo, -a, wet, moist, damp, humid.

humildad, _f._, humility.

humilde, humble.

humillar, to humble; _refl._, to humble oneself; to bow down.

humo, _m._, smoke, vapor, steam, fumes.

humor, _m._, humor; buen --, good humor, merriment; de buen --,
good-natured, jolly.

hundir, to sink, bury; -- una cuarta de hierro, to bury the spurs; to
spur deeply.

huracán, _m._, hurricane, storm.

húsar, _m._, hussar.


I


idea, _f._, idea, thought, plan, fancy, imagination.

idéntico, -a, identical.

idioma, _m._, language, idiom.

ido, -a, _pp. of_ ir, gone; absent.

iglesia, _f._, church.

ígneo, -a, of (_or_ pertaining to) fire.

ignorancia, _f._, ignorance.

ignorantón, _m._, great fool.

ignorar, to be ignorant of; not to know; _refl._, to be unknown.

ignoto, -a, unknown.

igual, equal, like, steady, even, uniform; the same; _subst. m._,
peer.

ijar, _m._, flank.

iluminar, to illuminate, light up; to enlighten.

ilusión, _f._, illusion.

ilustre, illustrious.

imagen, _f._, statue, figure, form, image; vision.

imaginación, _f._, imagination, fancy.

imaginario, -a, imaginary.

imaginarse, to imagine.

imbécil, _m._, imbecile, fool.

imitar, to imitate.

impaciencia, _f._, impatience; con --, impatiently.

impaciente, impatient; _adv._, impatiently.

impasible, impassible, unmoved, motionless.

impávido, -a, dauntless, intrepid.

impedir, to hinder.

impeler, to impel, urge.

impenetrable, impenetrable.

imperceptible, imperceptible.

imperial, imperial.

impetuoso, -a, impetuous.

impiedad, _f._, impiety, irreligion.

impío, -a, impious.

implorar, to implore.

imponente, imposing, impressive.

imponer, to impose.

importancia, _f._, importance.

importante, important.

importar, to be of importance; no

importa, no matter.

importe, _m._, value, cost.

importuno, -a, importunate.

imposible, impossible.

impotencia, _f._, impotence; amenazas de --, impotent threats.

impracticable, impracticable.

imprecación, _f._, imprecation, curse.

impregnar, to impregnate, saturate, imbue.

impresión, _f._, impression.

impreso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ imprimir, imprinted, stamped.

improvisar, to improvise, extemporize.

improviso, -a, unexpected; de --, suddenly, unexpectedly.

impulsar, to impel.

impulso, _m._, impulse, power, force, motion, gust; á --s de, moved
by, overcome by.

inagotable, inexhaustible

inanimado, -a, inanimate, lifeless. incansable, indefatigable,
tireless, unwearied; _adv._, tirelessly.

incendiar, to set on fire.

incertidumbre,_f._, uncertainty, hesitation.

incesante, incessant.

incidente, _m._, incident, event, episode.

incienso, _m._, incense.

incierto, -a, uncertain, wandering, restless.

incitar, to incite; to inspire.

inclinar, to incline, bend over; _refl._, to bend down, bow, lean.

incógnito, _m._, disguise, incognito.

incólume, safe, unharmed, in safety.

incomodar, to bother, disturb.

incomodidad,_f._, inconvenience.

incómodo, -a, comfortless, wretched; más vale -- que ninguno, better
comfortless quarters than none at all.

incomparable, incomparable.

incomprensible, incomprehensible.

inconcebible, inconceivable.

incontestable, irresistible.

inconveniente, _m._, objection, inconvenience, impropriety; no tener
--, not to consider improper; to have no objection.

incorporarse, to rise, get up, straighten up; á medias, to sit up.

incorpóreo, -a, incorporeal.

incorregible, incorrigible.

incredulidad, _f._, incredulity.

incrédulo, -a, incredulous.

increíble, incredible.

indecible, unspeakable, ineffable.

indeciso, -a, uncertain, indefinite.

indefinable, indefinable.

indescriptible, indescribable.

indicar, to indicate.

indiferente, indifferent.

indignación, _f._, indignation.

indiscreción, _f._, indiscretion.

indudablemente, indubitably, unquestionably.

inefable, ineffable, unspeakable.

inerte, inert, motionless, lifeless.

Inés, _f._, Agnes, Inez.

inesperado, -a, unexpected.

inexplicable, inexplicable.

inextinguible, inextinguishable, perpetual.

infecto, -a, infected, stagnant.

infeliz, unhappy, unfortunate, wretched; weak-minded; _subst._, poor
wretch, poor fellow.

infernal, infernal.

infiel, infidel; _subst. m. pl._, infidels, Moors, Saracens.

infiernos, _m. pl._, infernal regions; hell.

infinito, -a, infinite.

inflamarse, to catch fire, become inflamed.

influencia, _f._, influence.

influjo, _m._, influence.

informe, shapeless, formless.

infundir, to infuse, inspire, instill.

ingenio, _m._, ingenuity, cleverness, wit, mind.

ingenioso, -a, ingenious, clever.

ininteligible, unintelligible.

inmediato, -a, immediate, next, adjacent, very near.

inmensidad, _f._, immensity.

inmenso, -a, immense.

inmortal, immortal.

inmóvil, motionless.

iumovilidad, _f._, immobility.

inocencia, _f._, innocence.

inocentada, _f._, (_coll._) foolishness, foolish speech (_or_ action).

inocente, innocent, simple.

inquietar, to trouble, disquiet, make anxious, disturb.

inquieto, -a, restless, shifting, anxious, disquieting.

inquietud, _f._, restlessness, anxiety.

inquirir, to inquire.

inscripción, _f._, inscription.

insecto, _m._, insect.

inseguro, -a, unsteady.

insepulto, -a, unburied.

insignificante, insignificant.

insistencia, _f._, urgency, insistence.

insistir, to urge, persist, insist.

insolente, insolent.

insólito, -a, unusual, unaccustomed.

insomnio, _m._, insomnia.

insoportable, insufferable.

insostenible, indefensible, intolerable, unbearable.

inspiración, _f._, inspiration.

inspirar, to inspire.

instancia, _f._, entreaty.

instantaneamente, instantly.

instante, _m._, moment, instant; por--s, for some moments.

instintivamente, instinctively.

instrucción, _f._, instruction, direction.

instrumento, _m._, instrument, tool.

insufrible, intolerable, insufferable.

insulso, -a, insipid, dull, flat.

insulto, _m._, insult.

intangible, intangible.

inteligencia, _f._, intelligence, comprehension.

inteligente, skillful; _subst. m_, clever man.

intemperie, _f._, inclemency (of the. weather).

intención, _f._, intention, meaning, allusion; con --, on purpose;
purposely, designedly.

intensidad, _f._, intensity.

intenso, -a, intense.

intentar, to try, attempt, intend, mean, be about to.

interés, _m._, interest, concern.

interesar, to interest; -- se con, to be interested in.

interior, _m_, interior.

interiormente, inwardly, to oneself.

interlocutor, _m._, questioner, interlocutor.

interminable, interminable, endless.

internarse, to enter, penetrate.

interno, -a, internal.

interpelado, _ subst. m._, man (_or_ one) interrogated (_or_
questioned).

interpretar, to interpret, explain.

interrogación, _f._, question, interrogation.

interrumpir, to interrupt, break.

intersticio, _m._, interstice, crack.

intervalo, _m._, interval.

intimamente, intimately.

intimidar, to intimidate.

intranquilo, -a, restless, moving, shifting.

intrincado, -a, intricate, obscure.

introducción, _f_, introduction.

introito, _m._, (_eccl._) introit, a psalm or anthem sung immediately
before the communion or mass.

intruso, _m_, intruder.

inundar, to inundate.

inútil, useless, needless, unnecessary.

inútilmente, uselessly, in vain.

invadir, to invade.

invencible, invincible, irresistible, unconquerable.

invierno, _m._, winter.

invisible, invisible.

invitación, _f._, invitation.

invocar, to invoke.

involuntariamente, involuntarily.

involuntario, -a, involuntary.

inyectar, to inject, fill.

Íñigo, _m._, Ignatius.

ir, to go; to be; -aproximando, to approach; --subiendo de, to
increase, keep increasing; vamos, let us go; come, well, indeed;
¡vaya! well! come! indeed! nonsense! _refl._, to go away, go off,
escape.

ira, _f._, wrath, rage.

iris, _m._, iris; arco--, rainbow.

ironía, _f._, irony.

irrealizable, impossible (of realization).

irrecusable, irrefutable.

irresolute, -a, irresolute, undecided, wavering.

irritar, to irritate.

izquierdo, -a, left.


J


¡já! ha!

jabalí, _m._, wild boar.

jacinto, _m._, hyacinth.

jadeante, panting, out of breath.

jambs, never, ever.

jaramago, _m._, hedge-mustard.

jarana, _f._, scuffle, contest.

jardín, _m._, garden.

jauría, _f._, hounds, pack of dogs.

jazmin, _m._, jasmine.

jefe, _m._, chief, leader.

jerarquía, _f._, hierarchy.

Jesucristo, _m._, Jesus Christ.

Jesus, _m._, Jesus; ¡--! Lord! goodness!

jifero, _m._, butcher.

jilguero, _m._, linnet.

jinete, _m._, rider, horseman; _used as adj._, mounted (de, on),
astride.

jirón, _m._, tatter, bit, scrap; flag, pennant.

jornada, _f._, day's march (_or_ journey); journey; act.

Jose, _m._, Joseph.

joven, young; _subst, m. and f._, young man, young woman, boy, girl,
youth.

joya, _f._, jewel, brooch, small ornament (usually worn about the
neck).

júbilo, _m._, joy, rejoicing.

jubón, _m._, doublet.

juego, _m._, play, game, amusement, sport, trick.

juez, _m._, judge.

jugar, to play.

juglar, _m._, juggler, minstrel, conjurer.

juguete, _m._, toy, sport.

juguetear, to trifle, sport, dally, frolic.

juguetón, playful, sportive.

juicio, _m._, judgment, sense, trial.

junco, _m._, reed, rush.

juntar, to join, clasp, unite.

junto, -a, united, together, joined, (_pl._) side by side; prep., --á,
near, near to, close, at the side of, beside.

juramento, _m._, oath.

jurar, to swear, vow.

justicia, _f._, justice; hacer--, to execute.

justillo, _m._, jacket, jerkin, doublet.

justo, -a, just, exact, holy, righteous.

juventud, _f._, youth.

juzgar, to judge, think, consider, believe.


L


la, the.

la, her, to her; that, that one; _pl._, them, those; (one's) tricks;
(one's) doings (_or_ deeds); como las gasta, how he acts; how he
comports himself; what his tricks are; las relataban, would tell of
his deeds.

laberinto, _m._, labyrinth.

labio, _m._, lip.

labrador, _m._, farmer.

labrar, to till, cultivate.

ladera, _f._, declivity.

lado, _m._, side, direction; por su--, on one's own account; for
one-self; as far as he (_or_ she) is (_or_ was) concerned; por todos
--s, in all directions; al--tuyo, at your side.

ladrar, to bark.

ladrido, _m._, bark, barking.

lago, _m._, lake.

lágrima, _f._, tear.

lagrimón, _m._, large tear.

lamentación, _f._, lamentation.

lamento, _m._, lament, moaning, plaint, complaint.

lamer, to lap.

lámpara, _f._, lamp, light.

lance, _m._, case, incident, occurrence, critical moment.

languidez, _f._, languor, torpor.

lánguido, -a, languid.

lanza, _f._, lance.

lanzar, to hurl, cast, emit, dart; re _f._, to rush forth, dart out, be
cast (_or_ hurled); to jump, spring, swing oneself.

largo, -a, long, prolonged, large, broad; á lo--de, along, the length
of; _adv._, long.

larva, _f._, larva, hobgoblin, sprite.

lástima, _f._, pity, compassion; ¡ ! what a pity! it's a pity; too
bad! es (una)--, it is a pity.

lastimero, -a, piteous, sad, doleful, mournful.

latido, _m._, palpitation, beat.

latin, _m._, Latin.

latir, to beat, palpitate; to bark, yelp; _subst._ _m._, bark(s),
barking.

laudable, laudable, praiseworthy.

lava, _f._, lava.

lavar, to wash, lave.

Lázaro, _m._, Lazarus.

lazo, _m._, tie, bond, fetter.

le, him, to him, to her, you, to you, it.

lebrel, _m._, greyhound.

lección, _f._, lesson.

lector, _m._, reader.

leche, f, milk.

lecho, _m._, bed, couch.

leer, to read.

légamo, _m._, mud, slime.

legión, _f._, legion.

legua, _f._, league, about four miles.

lejano, -a, distant, remote.

legos, far, afar, far off; á lo --, at a distance, afar, far off; in
the distance; desde --, from a distance.

lengua, _f._, tongue, language.

lenguaje, _m._, language, speech.

lentamente, slowly.

lentisco, _m._, lentiscus, mastic, a low, shrubby tree, growing upon
the islands and coasts of the Mediterranean.

lentitud, _f._, slowness; con --, slowly.

lento, -a, slow.

letra, _f._, letter; _pl._, letters, words.

levadizo, -a, raisable; puente --, drawbridge.

levantar, to raise; -- el vuelo, to rise in flight, _refl._, to arise,
raise oneself, rise, get up.

leve, light, slight, trifling, gay.

ley, _f._, law; cartas leyes, summons.

leyenda, _f._, legend; inscription.

liar, to tie, bind; _refl._, to entwine about, to bind oneself.

libación, _f._, libation.

libélula, _f._, libellula, dragon-fly.

libertad, _f._, liberty, freedom.

libertar, to free, liberate, protect.

librar, to deliver, preserve.

libre, free.

libro, _m._, book.

licencioso, -a, licentious.

licor, _m._, liquor, wine.

lienzo, _m._, linen, linen cloth (_or_ veil); curtain.

ligar, to render impotent by charms or spells.

ligeramente, lightly, slightly.

ligereza, _f._, lightness, agility.

ligerfsimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ ligero, very (_or_ extremely) light
(trifling _or_ insignificant).

ligero, -a, light, slight, thin, quick, swift, fleeting.

lima, _f._, file.

limbo, _m._, border.

limitar, to limit, confine.

limite, _m._, limit, confines, bounds, boundary.

limosnero, -a, charitable.

limpiar, to wipe.

limpidez, _f._, limpidity.

limpido, -a, limpid, clear, pure.

lindo, -a, handsome, pretty, nice.

linea, _f._, line; -- divisoria, boundary.

lino, _m._, canvas, linen.

linterna, _f._, lantern.

lira, _f._, lyre.

lirio, _m._, iris, lily.

lisonjero, -a, flattering.

lista, _f._, shred, patch.

litera, _f._, litter.

literario, -a, literary.

lo, the.

lo, it, him.

lo, that; -- que, that which, what, whatever; --s que, those who (_or_
which).

lobo, _m._, wolf.

lóbrego, -a, dark, obscure, gloomy.

local, _m._, place, site.

loco, -a, wild, hilarious, mad, foolish, _ subst. m. and f._, madman,
mad woman (_or_ girl); cada -- con su tema, everybody (_lit._ every
fool) has his hobby.

locuela, _f._, madcap.

locura, _f._, madness.

lograr, to bring about, succeed.

loma, _f._, hill, hillock.

lomo, _m._, back; _pl._, back; á --s de, on the back of.

longanimidad, _f._, longanimity, long-suffering, long-sufferance.

lonjista, _m._, grocer, shopkeeper.

lontananza, _f._, distance; en --, in the distance; afar (off).

loor, _m._, (_poet._) praise.

Lope, _m._, (_Span._) Lope (from Lupus).

losa, _f._, flag, flagstone; slab.

lóbrico, -a, lewd, vile.

lucido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ lucir, brilliant, magnificent.

luciérnaga, _f._, glow-worm, firefly.

Lucifer, _m._, Lucifer, Satan.

lucir, to shine, be (_or_ become) bright; to display, wear.

lucha, _f._, strife, struggle, contest, battle.

luchar, to strive, struggle.

luego, then, presently, immediately, now, at once; desde --, at once,
straightway, thereupon, immediately.

luengo, -a, long.

lugar, _m._, place, town, village, spot, region, area; time,
opportunity; dar --, to give rise, give place; dejar --, to give
place; tener --, to happen, take place.

lugubre, mournful, lugubrious.

lujo, _m._, luxury.

lujosisimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ lujoso, very (_or_ most) luxurious.

lujoso, -a, luxurious, lavish.

lumbre, _f._, fire.

luminoso, -a, luminous, of light, with a halo of light.

luna, _f._, moon; noche de--, moonlight night.

luto, _m._, mourning.

luz, _f._, light; dar á la--, to give birth to; dos dedos de--, a thin
streak of light.

Ll

llama, _f._, flame.

llamar, to call, beckon, knock; -- á la puerta, to knock (at the
door); -- la atención, to attract the attention; _refl._, to be
called, be named.

llamear, to flame, gleam, shine.

llano, _m._, plain; por montes y -s, over hill and dale.

llanto, _m._, cry; flood of tears; tears.

llanura, _f._, plain.

llave, _f._, key.

llegada, _f_, arrival.

llegar, to arrive, come, come to a (certain) point, go so far as, go,
reach; -- á, to reach, arrive at, succeed in, go so far as to; llegué
á tener miedo, I finally became afraid; -- y besar el santo, to
succeed in a brief space of time; to find good fortune quickly.

llenar, to fill; _refl._, to be filled.

lleno, -a, full, covered (with).

llevar, to take, bear, support, get, carry, place, put, raise, bring,
lead, take away, draw on, attract; to wear; -- á cabo, to execute,
carry out, bring to a successful conclusion, terminate successfully;
-- del diestro, to lead (by the halter or bridle); -- á término, to
succeed, carry out, perform.

llorar, to cry, weep, weep for, mourn, grieve; nos amanecía llorando,
dawn found us weeping llorón, tearful, whimpering, lachrymose, given
to weeping, apt to shed tears.

llover, to rain.

lluvia,_f_, rain, shower.


M


macizo, -a, massive.

machón, _m._, buttress, counter-fort.

madera. _f._, wood, woodwork.

madre, _f._, mother.

madreselva, _f_, honeysuckle.

maese, _m. (obsolete) _, master.

maestro, _m._, master, teacher; de capilla, choir-master, one who
composes and directs church music.

magnate, _m._, magnate.

magnífico, -a, magnificent.

majaderfa, _f_, absurd (_or_ foolish) speech; nonsense.

majestad, _f_, majesty.

majestuoso, -a, majestic.

mal, _adj._ See malo; _adv._, badly, poorly; _subst. m._, evil, ill,
spell, evil act (_or_ speech); hacer -- de ojo, to cast the evil eye;
quien (en) -- anda, (en) -- acaba, a bad beginning makes a bad ending.

maldad,_f._, wickedness, wicked act.

maldecir, to revile, curse.

maldición, _f._, malediction, curse.

maldito, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ maldecir, accursed.

maleficio, _m._, enchantment.

malestar, _m._, uneasiness.

maleza, _f._, thicket, brake; underbrush malhechor, _m._, malefactor,
criminal.

maliciar, to suspect.

malicioso, -a, mischievous, sly, roguish, malicious, evil-minded.

maligno, -a, malignant, evil.

malo, -a, bad, poor, ill, evil, worthless, wicked.

malla, _f._, (coat of) mail.

manada, _f._, herd, flock, pack.

mancebo, _m._, boy, youth, young man.

mancha, _f._, spot.

manchar, to stain.

mandar, to order, command, send orders; to send; -- comparecer, to
summon (to appear) mandoble, _m._, two-handed sword, broadsword.

manejar, to handle, wield.

manera, _f._, manner, way; de todas --s, at all events, at any rate.

manga, _f._, sleeve; --s perdidas, loose hanging sleeves.

mango, _m._, handle.

manjar, _m._, dish, tidbit; _pl._, food.

mano, _f._, hand; de --s á. boca, all of a sudden; unexpectedly; echar
-- de, to lay hands upon, take possession of; entre sus --s, in his
hands; tomar -- en ello, to take it in hand (_or_ a hand in it).

manojo, _m._, bundle, bunch, bouquet.

mansedumbre, _f._, meekness, humility.

manso, -a, meek, soft, gentle, mild.

mantener, to maintain, keep; _refl._, to remain, continue, stay, be.

manto, _m._, cloak.

mafia, _f._, pains, care, skill; evil custom, evil way.

mañana, _f._, morning; de la noche à la --, all of a sudden, when
(you) least expected (it); _adv._, to-morrow.

maquinalmente, mechanically.

mar, _m._ or _f._, sea.

maravilla, _f._, marvel, wonder, miracle.

maravillar, to astonish, be astonished, wonder, marvel.

maravilloso, -a, marvelous.

marcar, to mark, designate, stain.

marcial, martial, warlike.

marchar, to march, walk, go, advance; marchando de sorpresa en
sorpresa, ever more and more surprised; _refl._, to get off (_or_
away); to escape.

marchito, -a, withered, faded.

marfil, _m._, ivory.

margarita _f._, daisy.

margen, _f._, margin, bank, border, edge.

María, _f._, Mary.

marido, _m._, husband.

mariposa, _f._, butterfly.

mármol, _m._, marble; _pl._ marble, marbles.

marmóreo, -a, marble, of marble.

marqués, _m._, marquis.

martillo, _m._, hammer.

mártir, _m._, martyr.

martirio, _m._, martyrdom; _pl._, martyrdom.

mas, but, however.

más, _adv._, more, most; -- bien, rather; á -- andar, at full speed; á
-- de, besides; á -- y mejor, the best they could; the most possible;
vying with one another; mientras --...--, the more .., the more; en lo
-- mínimo, in the least; lo -- posible, as much as possible; -- que,
more than, other than, except, but; no -- que, no more than, no other
than; only; no -- (_for_ no -- que), only; por -- que, however much;
especially since; although; que no haya -- que oir, that nothing else
can be heard; -- que de prisa (_lit._, more than rapidly), as rapidly
as possible; sobre -- ó menos, more or less; approximately, nearly,
about.

masa, _f._, mass.

mascara, _f._, mask.

mata, _f._, shrub, bush, underbrush; apiñadas --s, tangled (_or_
dense) shrubbery (_or_ underbrush).

matar, to kill.

material, material, corporeal, physical.

matizar, to color, adorn, tint, paint.

matojo, _m._, bush.

matorral, _m._, field of brambles; thicket; _pl._, brambles, briers,
thicket.

matrimonio, _m._, marriage, matrimony.

Mayo, _m._, May.

mayor, greater, older, elder, better, best, greatest; main, chief,
principal; _subst. m. pl._, elders; ancestors.

me, me, to me.

mecer, to rock, swing, sway; _refl._, to balance oneself; to swing,
sway, hover, stir, shake.

mediante, by means of; in consideration of; for.

mediar, to be (_or_ come) between; to intervene.

médico, _m._, doctor.

medida, _f._, measure, proportion; á ---- que, in proportion as.

medio, -a, half, mid, middle; á -- abrir, half open; á la media hora,
within half an hour; á media voz, in a low tone; á medias, half; media
noche, midnight; _adv._, half, partially; _subst. m._, middle, means,
way, midst, medium, intermediary; de -- á --, completely; en -- de, in
the midst of; between; por en -- de, through the midst of; through.

medir, to measure; to compare; -se con los ojos, to scan each other.

meditar, to meditate.

medroso, -a, fearful, frightful.

médula. _f._, marrow.

mejilla, _f._, cheek.

mejor, _comp._ of bueno, better, best; _adv._, better, best; por --
decir, in other words; ó -- dicho, or rather; rather; á mas y --,
best they could; the most possible; vying with one another.

melancolía, _f._, melancholy.

melancolíco, -a, melancholy, gloomy, sad.

melodía, _f._, melody.

memoria, _f._, memory, memorial; de --, by heart; hacer -- de, to
remember; traer á la --, to bring to the memory; to remind.

menor, minor, lesser; el --, the least.

menos, _adv._, less, least; except, with the exception of; á lo --, at
least; al --, at least; la cosa no era para --, nothing less could be
expected; no poder (por) -- de, not to be able to help; sobre más ó
--, more or less; approximately, nearly, about; vuelven -- de los que
van, fewer return than go.

mente, _f._, mind.

mentecato, -a, silly, foolish, stupid; _subst. m._, fool.

mentira, _f._, lie.

menudo, -a, slight, common, small, light, gentle, slender, short;
gente menuda, servants, domestics, dependants.

merced, _f._, grace, gift, favor, thanks; -- á, thanks to.

merecer, to merit, deserve; to obtain.

mérito, _m._, merit, worth.

mes, _m._, month.

mesa, _f._, table.

mesar, to pluck (out); to tear.

meseta, _f._, landing; table-land, plateau.

metal, _m._, metal.

metálico, -a, metallic.

meteoro, _m._, meteor.

mezcla, _f._, mixture.

mezclar, to mix, mingle; _refl._, to be mingled; to meddle.

mezquino, -a, poor, little, trifling, mean, wretched.

miedo, _m._, fear; tener--, to be afraid.

miembro, _m._, limb, member.

mientras, while, whilst, when, as long as; --que, while, whereas;
--más... más, the more... the more.

mies, _f._, wheat; _pl._, harvests, crops.

mi, my.

mí, me.

mil, thousand, a thousand, one thousand, ten hundred.

milagro, _m._, miracle.

milagroso, -a, marvelous, miraculous.

milicias, _f.__pl._, militia; army, host(s).

militar, _m._, soldier.

millar, _m._, thousand.

millón, _m._, million.

mínimo, -a, least; en lo más--, in the least.

ministril, _m._, apparitor, beadle; petty officer.

ministro, _m._, minister.

minucioso, -a, minute, detailed.

minuto, _m._, minute; á los cinco --s, within five minutes; á los
pocos --s, in (_or_ within) a few minutes.

mío, -a, mine, my; el--, la mía, mine.

mirada, _f._, glance, look; tender una--, to take a look; to look; to
glance.

mirador, _m._, mirador, belvedere, oriel, lookout, observatory.

mirar, to look, look at, gaze at; to see; --se entre si, to look at
each other (_or_ one another).

misa, _f._, mass; Misa del Gallo, midnight mass on Christmas eve.

miseria, _f._, poverty, penury; worthlessness, destitution.

misericordia, _f._, mercy.

mismo, -a, same, self, very; de un -- rey, of (one and) the same king.

misterio, _m._, mystery, secret.

misterioso, -a, mysterious.

misticismo, _m._, mysticism.

mistico, -a, mystic.

mitad, _f._, middle, midst; half.

mitra, _f._, miter.

modesto, -a, modest.

modo, _m._, manner, way; de este--, in this manner; as follows;
de--que, so that; de tal--, in such a way; so well; de todos--s, at
all events, at any rate, however.

mofa, _f._, mockery, scorn.

mofarse, to scoff, mock, make fun of.

molestar, to disturb, molest.

molesto, -a, disagreeable, vexing, vexatious.

molido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ moler, tired, fatigued.

momentáneo, -a, momentary.

momento, _m._, moment; consequence; --s antes..., a few moments
before..

monarca, _m._, monarch, king.

monasterio, _m._, monastery.

monja, _f._, nun.

monje, _m._, monk.

mono, _m._, monkey, ape; hacer --s, to play tricks, do wonderful (_or_
amusing) feats.

monótono, -a, monotonous.

monserga, _f._, gabble, gibberish, confused language.

mónstruo, _m._, monster.

monstruoso, -a, monstrous.

montante, PT.., broadsword.

montaña, _f._, mountain.

montar, to mount, go up, get on; -- nuevamente, to remount.

monte, _m._, mountain; cuchillo de --, hunting-knife, hunter's
cutlass; por --s y llanos, over hill and dale.

montero, _m._, hunter, huntsman.

montura, _f_, saddle.

morado, -a, violet, mauve-colored.

morador, _m._, inhabitant.

moral, _m._, morale, moral condition (state _or_ organization).

morar, to dwell, reside.

mórbido, -a, soft, mellow, rich, subdued, delicate.

morder, to bite, eat into, cut, abrade, prick, gnaw.

moreno, -a, dark.

moribundo, -a, dying, faint, fainting.

morir, to die, expire, die out; _refl._, to die, die away, pass away.

morisco, -a, Moorish, of (_or_ pertaining to) the Moors.

moro, _m._, Moor.

mortal, mortal, fatal; s&t. _m._, mortal.

mortuorio, mortuary.

mosca, _f._, fly.

moscardón, _m._, large fly, horse-fly, gadfly.

mostrar, to show; _refl._, to show oneself, appear, be.

mote, _m._, motto, heading.

motete, _m._, motet, a sacred musical composition.

mover, to move; -- guerra, to make war; _refl._, to move.

movimiento, _m._, movement, motion, commotion; -- de cabeza, nod (of
the head).

mozo, _m._, boy, youth, lad, young man.

muchacha, _f._, girl.

muchacho, _m._, boy, lad.

muchedumbre, _f._, crowd, multitude.

mucho, -a, much; _pl._, many; por --s que, however many; _adv._, much,
very, greatly.

mudable, changeable, fickle.

mudo, -a, mute, silent, speechless, dumb.

muerte, _f._, death; á --, to the death; herir de --, to strike dead.

muerto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ morir, died, dead; los --s, the dead;
¡muerto está! he is a dead boar!

muestra, _f._, proof, demonstration, mark, sign.

mugir, to roar, rumble.

mujer, _f._, woman, wife.

mula, _f._, mule.

mulo, _m._, mule.

multiplicarse, to multiply, be multiplied, increase.

multitud, _f._, multitude, crowd, great number.

mundano, -a, mundane, worldly.

mundo, _m._, world; crowd, multitude; society; por el --, in society;
out; por esos --s, into the world at large; todo el --, everybody;
todo un --, a whole world; a great multitude.

muralla, _f._, rampart, wall.

murir, to die.

murmullo, _m._, murmur.

murmuración, _f._, murmur, rumor; slander, gossip.

murmurador, murmuring.

murmurar, to murmur; _refl._, to be murmured (rumored _or_ reported).

muro, _m._, wall.

músculo, _m._, muscle.

musgo, _m._, moss.

musgoso, -a, mossy, covered with moss, moss-covered.

música, _f._, music; _pl._, music, musical notes (_or_ sounds).

mustio, -a, sad, sorrowful.

mutuamente, mutually; each other.

mutuo, -a, mutual.

muy, very, very much, quite.


N


nácar, _m._, nacre, pearl, mother-of-pearl.

nacer, to be born.

naciente, rising, on-coming, falling.

nacimiento, _m._, birth, rise.

nación, _f._, nation.

nada, nothing; ¡--! not at all; by no means; no indeed; never mind; it
makes no difference; ¡--, --! (_an exclamation of denial or refusal_),
nothing else will do; no ... --, nothing; not anything; en --, in any
respect; at all; -- menos, nothing less; para --, in any respect; at
all; pues --, but no; not so.

nadar, to swim, float.

nadie, no one, nobody; some one, somebody.

nariz, _f._, nose, nostrils; reirse en la --, to laugh in one's face.

narración, _f._, narration, story.

narrador, _m._, narrator.

narrar, to relate, tell.

natural, natural; native.

naturaleza, _f._, nature.

naturalmente, naturally, by nature.

navaja, _f._, knife, clasp-knife.

nave, _f._, nave; _pl._, nave and aisles.

nebuloso, -a, misty, cloudy.

necedad, _f._, stupidity, folly.

necesitado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ necesitar, needed; needing, needy, in
need (de, of).

necesitar, to need, be in need of, want, lack, be necessary.

negro, -a, black, dark.

nervioso, -a, nervous.

ni, neither, nor, not even, nor even; even, or; -- aun, not even; --
... tampoco, nor .. either; no ... --, not ... even; -- ... --,
neither ... nor; -- tan siquiera, not even, not so much as.

nicho. _m._, niche, hole, grave.

nido, _m._, nest.

niebla, _f._, mist, fog, cloud.

nieto, _m._, grandchild.

nieve, _f._, snow: _pl_, snow.

ninguno (_or_ ninghn), -a, no, none; any, any one; either; -- (de los
dos), neither (of us); no ... --, none, not any.

niña, _f._, child, girl.

niñez, _f._, childhood.

niño, _m._, child, boy; muy desde--since (_or_ from) early boyhood.

no, not, no; -- más (_for_ -- más que), only; -- poder (por) menos de,
not to be able to help; -- que, while, whilst; como -- sea, unless it
be; -- sea que, lest, for fear; -- ... ya (_or_ ya ... --), no longer.

noble, noble; _subst._ _m._, noble, lord.

nobleza, _f._, nobility.

nocturno, -a, nocturnal.

noche, _f._, night, evening; en la alta--, in the dead of night; late
at night; Noche-Buena, Christmas eve; mass of Christmas eve; de -- y
día, night and day; esta -- pasada, last night; la -- había cerrado,
the night had come (_or_ fallen); night had closed in (around him);
¡hasta la --! (good-by) till to-night; goodby; -- de luna, moonlight
night; de la -- á la mañana, all of a sudden, when (you) least
expected (it); media --, midnight; por las --s, in the night; at
night; una -- y otra, night after night.

nombre, _m._, name; sin --, nameless; boundless, indescribable.

noria, _f._, sakieh, a kind of machine for raising water from wells
etc., consisting of two wheels, one horizontal and one vertical, and
of an endless chain armed with cups (or buckets).

nos, we, us, ourselves, each other, one another; to us, to ourselves.

nosotros,-as, we, us.

nota, _f._, note, tone, tune. notable, remarkable.

notar, to note, notice, observe; _refl._, to be noticed (_or_
noticeable).

noticia, _f._, notice, news, information; tener -- de, to be informed
of.

notificar, to notify.

novedad, _f._, novelty, news, fad, innovation.

novia, _f._, bride, newly married wife.

novicia, _f._, novice.

nube, _f._, cloud, film, crowd; -- de sangre, bloody film.

nublar (_for_ anublar), to cloud, darken.

nuestro, -a, our, ours; el --, la nuestra, ours.

nueva, _f._, news.

nuevamente, anew, again; montar --, to remount.

nueve, nine.

nuevo, -a, new, recently arrived, unacquainted; de --, again, anew.

número, _m._, number.

numeroso, -a, numerous.

nunca, never, ever; no ... --, never; not at all, by no means.


O


ó, or, either; -- bien, or, or else; bien ... --, whether ... or;
either ... or.

obedecer, to obey, yield to.

obediente, obedient.

obispo, _m._, bishop.

objetar, to object, oppose.

objeto, _m._, object, purpose.

obligación, _f._, obligation.

obligado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ obligar, obliged; necessary, unavoidable,
indispensable, natural.

obra, _f._, work; matter; -- de, at (_or_ of) about, about; como --
de, a matter of; about; poner por --, to carry out, execute.

obscurecer, to obscure, blind, darken, grow dark; _refl._, to grow
dark, be (_or_ become) dark; to go out.

obscuridad, _f._, obscurity, gloom.

obscuro, -a, dark, obscure.

observar, to observe.

obstáculo, _m._, obstacle.

obstante: no --, nevertheless, notwithstanding.

obstinado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ obstinarse, obstinate, obdurate.

obtener, to obtain, secure, bring about.

ocasión, _f._, occasion, opportunity, juncture.

ocaso, _m._, west.

occidente, _m._, west.

océano, _m._, ocean, sea.

ocio, _m._, leisure.

ocioso, -a, idle, unoccupied, bored.

octava, _f._, octave, eight-day celebration of a religious festival.

ocultar, to hide, conceal.

oculto, -a, hidden, concealed, secret.

ocupación, _f._, occupation.

ocupar, to fill, occupy, take possession of, busy; _refl._, to busy
oneself, be busy.

ocurrencia, _f._, sally, flash of wit.

ocurrir, to happen, occur.

ofender, to offend.

ofertorio, _m._, offertory.

oficial, _m._, official, officer.

oficiar, to officiate.

oficio, _m._, trade, business, occupation, service, office, craft,
profession.

oficioso, -a, officious.

ofrecer, to offer, present; _refl._, to present itself, appear.

ofrenda, _f._, offering.

¡oh!, oh!

oído, _m._, hearing, ear; prestar el --, to pay attention; to listen
(carefully).

oir, to hear; -- á, to hear from; estuve oyendo, I kept hearing; que
no haya más que --, that nothing else can be heard; _refl._, to be
heard, be audible.

ojeada, _f._, glance, look.

ojeo, _m._, battue, beating for game; que hacían señales de --, which
were blowing to start up the game.

ojiva, _f._, Gothic (_or_ pointed) window.

ojival, ogival, characterized by the pointed arch.

ojo, _m._, eye; darse de --, to conspire, have a secret understanding;
en un abrir y cerrar de --s, in the twinkling of an eye; in an
instant; hacer mal de --, to cast the evil eye; medirse con los --s,
to scan each other.

ola, _f._, wave.

olmo, _m._, elm.

olor, _m._, odor; tener en -- de santidad, to hold (_or_ consider) as
a saint.

olvidar, to forget.

olvido, _m._, oblivion, forgetfulness.

omnipotencia, _f._, omnipotence.

onda, _f._, wave.

ondina, _f._, undine, water-sprite.

ondulante, rolling.

ondular, to undulate.

operación, _f._, operation, act.

oponerse, to oppose.

oprimir, to oppress, press, clasp.

opuesto, -a, opposite.

opulento, -a, rich, opulent.

ora, now; -- ... --, now ... now (_or_ again).

oración, _f._, prayer, orison, adoration; á la --, to prayers.

orden, _m._, order, regularity, decorum; _f._, order, command,
insignia.

ordenar, to order, command, lay upon; to organize.

oreja, _f._, auricle, ear.

organista, _m._, organist.

órgano, _m._, organ.

orgía, _f._, orgy, revelry, revel.

orgullo, _m._, pride.

orgulloso, -a, proud, haughty.

origen, _m._, origin, cause, birth, descent.

original, original; _subst. m._, original.

orilla, _f._, bank, shore.

orín, _m._, rust.

orla, _f._, border, fringe, edge.

orlar, to border.

ornar, to adorn.

oro, _m._, gold.

os, you, to you.

osar, to dare.

oscilar, to oscillate, hover, sway.

ostracismo, _m._, ostracism.

otoño, _m._, autumn.

otro, -a, other, another, else, next; alguno que --, here and there
one; a very few; some; el -- día, the next day; un día y --, day after
day; constantly; en --s días, in other (_or_ former) days; once,
formerly; una noche y --, night after night; (el) uno y (el) --, both;
otras tantas (veces), as many (times); otra vez, again; una vez y
otra, again and again.

ovalado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ovalar, oval.

oveja, _f._, sheep, ewe.


P


pabellón, _m._, tent (or canopy); bower

pábulo, _m._, food, support, aid.

pacer, to graze, pasture.

paciencia, _f._, patience.

paciente, patient.

pacifico, -a, peaceful, pacific.

padecer, to be afflicted.

padre, _m._, father; _pl._, parents; ancestors.

pagar, to pay, pay for, repay.

página, _f._, page.

pago, _m._, payment, recompense.

país, _m._, country.

paja, _f._, straw.'

pájaro, _m._, bird, sparrow; _pl._, birds.

paje, _m._, page.

palabra, _f._, word; dirigir la -- , to address, speak; tomar la --,
to speak.

palacio, palacio, _m._, palace.

palafrén, _m._, palfrey.

palafrenero, _m._, groom.

palidez, _f._, pallor, paleness.

pálido, -a, pale.

palma, _f._, palm; batir las --s, to clap the hands.

palmera, _f._, palm.

palmo, _m._, span; cuatro --s, a small space.

palo, _m._, stick, wood; dar de --s, to beat, give a beating; to
cudgel.

paloma, _f._, pigeon, dove.

palpar, to feel, touch.

palpitar, to palpitate, quiver.

pan, _m._, bread, loaf of bread.

pandero, _m._, tambourine.

paño, _m._, cloth, table-cloth.

Papa, _m._, pope.

papel, _m._, paper.

par, equal, like; al --, at the same time; without distinction; alike;
equally; á -- de, the same as, like; near, by, at; together with, at
the same time with; al -- de, like, as; at the same time with; de --
en -- abierto, wide open; _subst. m._, pair, couple.

para, for, to, in order to; -- con, to, amongst; estar --, to be about
to; la cosa no era -- menos, nothing less could be expected; -- nada,
in any (_or_ no) respect; at all; -- que, so that, in order that; no
hay -- qué decir que se fastidiaban, it is needless to say they were
bored; ¿-- que? wherefore? why? for what reason?

parábola, _f._, parable.

parador, _m._, inn.

paraíso, _m._, paradise.

paraje, _m._, place.

páramo, _m._, a high bleak plateau with stunted trees and cold damp
atmosphere; (_poet._) desert, waste.

parar, to stop; _refl._, to stop, halt.

parecer, to seem, be like, resemble; al --, seemingly, apparently; á
lo que parece, as it seems; evidently; _refl._, to resemble, be like.

parecido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ parecer, seemed; similar, like.

pared, _f._, wall, partition.

pareja, _f._, pair, couple.

pariente,_m._, relative.

párpado, _m._, eyelid.

parroquia, _f._, parish, parochial church.

parte, _f._, part, portion, direction; á esta --, up to now; de algún
tiempo á esta --, for some time past, for some time now; en --,
partly; en alguna --, somewhere; por mi --, for my part; por todas
--s, in every direction; everywhere; por una --, on the one hand.

participar, to participate (de, in).

particular, peculiar, special, strange, particular.

particularidad, _f._, peculiarity.

particularmente, particularly, especially.

partido, _m._, resolution.

partir, to set out, leave, depart.

pasadizo, _m._, gallery, arcade, covered passageway.

pasado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pasar, passed; past; last; after.

pasajero, _m._, passer-by.

pasar, to pass, while away, move, advance, go, pass through, take
place, happen, go on, be the matter; -- de, to pass, pass beyond, be
more than; -- de aquí, to go (any) further (or farther).

pasear, to move about, sweep about, cast around; _refl._, to walk
about, walk back and forth (_or_ to and fro).

pasión, _f._, passion, love.

pasmoso, -a, wonderful, remarkable.

paso, _m._, step, footstep, pace, passage, pass, difficulty,
embarrassment; -- á --, step for step; step by step; abrir --, to open
up a passage; to make way; dar un --, to take a step; dejar --, to let
pass, make way.

pastor, _m._, shepherd.

patio, _m._, court.

patraña, _f._, fable, story, tale.

patrimonio, _m._, patrimony, inheritance.

patrón, _m._ See patrono.

patrona, _f._, patron, mistress, lady, patron saint, guardian,
protector.

patrono, _m._, patron, protector, master, patron saint.

pausa, _f._, pause.

pavimento, _m._, pavement, floor.

pavor, _m._, fear, dread, awe.

paz, _f._, peace.

pecador, _m._, sinner.

pechero, _m._, vassal, commoner.

pecho, _m._, breast.

pedantesco, -a, pedantic.

pedazo, _m._, piece; hacer --s, to make pieces of, break to pieces; á
--s, in bits, to pieces.

pedernal, _m._, flint, stone, flintstone.

pedestal, _m._, pedestal, foundation.

pedir, to ask, ask for, beg, request, beseech, pray.

pedrada, _f._, stoning; á --s, by stoning (them).

pedregoso, -a, stony, rocky.

pedrería, _f._, gems, precious stones.

Pedro, _m._, Peter.

pedrusco, _m._, (rough) block of stone; stone (_or_ marble) slab (_or_
block); bowlder.

pegar, to fasten, close, shut, join.

pelado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pelar, bared, bare, bleak, treeless.

pelea, _f._, battle, fight, combat.

pelear, to fight, struggle, combat.

peligro, _m._, danger.

peligroso, -a, dangerous.

pellica, _f._, fur garment, fur coat.

pena, _f._, pain, penalty, trouble, bother, affliction, grief,
difficulty; á duras --s, with great difficulty.

penacho, _m._, panache, crest, plume(s).

penalidad, _f._, hardship, suffering.

penar, to suffer torment; andar penando, to suffer torment.

pender, to hang, be suspended; -- de, to depend upon; to wait for;
pendiente de, while waiting for; until I learned.

pendiente, _f._, slope.

pendón, _m._, banner, pennant, standard.

péndulo, m, pendulum, (_here_) tick (of the pendulum).

penetrante, penetrating.

penetrar, to penetrate, enter, gain entrance; _refl._, to enter,
penetrate.

penitencia, _f._, penance, act of mortification.

penitente, penitent.

penoso, -a, painful, distressing.

pensamiento, _m._, thought, resolution, purpose; con el --, to
oneself; in one's own mind; in thought.

pensar, to think, think over, reflect upon, consider, mean, intend; --
en, to think of.

penumbra, _f._, penumbra, partial shadow.

peña, _f._, large rock, bowlder, cliff.

peñascal, _m._, rocky hill (or mountain).

peñasco, _m._, rock, cliff, large rock, bowlder.

peñon, _m._, rock, cliff.

peon, _m._, footman, foot-soldier, laborer, farm-hand.

peró, _comp. of_ malo, worse, worst; el --, the worst; lo --, the
worst (thing _or_ part).

pequeñito, -a, very small, tiny.

pequeño, -a, little, small.

pequefiuclo, -a, small, very small, tiny; _subst. m. and f._, little
boy, little girl, little one.

percibir, to perceive, see, hear, comprehend; _refl._, to be seen
(_or_ be visible), be heard (_or_ be audible).

perder, to lose, destroy, miss, give up; -- pie, to lose one's footing
(_or_ foothold); -- de vista, to lose sight of; _refl._, to be lost;
to disappear, vanish; to die out (_or_ away).

perdido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ perder, lost, vanished; impious; falling,
wandering, lone; estrella perdida, lone (_or_ lost) star; mangas
perdidas, loose hanging sleeves.

perdón, _m._, pardon, forgiveness, excuse.

perdonar, to pardon.

perdulariote, _m._, shiftless fellow.

perdurable, perpetual, everlasting.

perecer, to perish, die.

peregrenación, _f._, wandering, peregrination.

peregrino, -a, strange, wonderful; _subst. m._, wanderer, pilgrim.

pereroso, -a, idle, indolent.

perfectamente, perfectly.

perfil, _m._, profile, outline, contour.

perfumado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ perfumar, perfumed, odoriferous.

perfume, _m.._, perfume, odor, fragrance.

periódico, _m._, newspaper.

peripecia, _f._, peripetia, sudden change of fortune, vicissitude,
catastrophe, event.

perjurar, to protest, reiterate.

perla, _f._, pearl.

permanecer, to remain, persist, continue.

permiso, _m._, permission.

permitir, to permit, allow, consent.

pero, but.

Pero, _m._, dim. _of_ pedro. see caldera

perpendicular, perpendicular.

perro, _m._, dog.

persecución, _f._, persecution.

perseguidor, _m._, pursuer, persecutor, foe.

perseguir, to pursue, follow, persecute.

persianas, _f. pl._, Venetian blinds.

persignarse, to cross oneself.

persona, _f._, person.

persouaje, _m._, personage, character, person, great personage.

personalidad, _f._, personality.

persouificar, to personify.

persuadirse, to persuade (_or_ convince) oneself.

persuasión, _f._, persuasion, conviction; en la firme -- de que,
firmly persuaded that.

perteuecer, to belong.

pertinacia, _f._, obstinacy.

pertrechar, to provide, furnish, equip (de, with); to give a supply
(de, of).

pesadilla, _f._, nightmare.

pesado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ pesar, heavy, ponderous.

pesar, to weigh, be heavy.

pesar, _m._, grief, sorrow; á -- de (_adv._), despite, in spite of,
notwithstanding.

peso, _m._, weight; á su --, by its own weight.

pestaña, _f._, eyelash.

pestes, _f. pl._, words of vexation or threat; echar -- de, to storm
at.

petición, _f._, petition, prayer.

piadoso, -a, pious.

piafar, to paw; _subst._ _m._, pawing.

piau pianito, gently, softly.

picacho, _m._, top, peak.

picado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ picar, pricked, piqued, excited, aroused.

picar, to prick, pique, spur.

pico, _m._, point, peak, summit; small amount, odd; balance; cortado á
--, perpendicular, precipitous; allá por los años de mil trescientos y
--, back there in the year thirteen hundred and something.

pie, _m._, foot; footing; de --, on foot, standing; ponerse de --, to
stand (_or_ get) up; servidor de á --, footman; echar -- á tierra, to
dismount; perder --, to lose one's footing (_or_ foothold); volver
pies, to turn (one's steps); volver pies atrás, to turn back.

piedad, _f._, piety, pity, mercy; por --, for pity's sake; out of
compassion.

piedra, _f._, stone, rock.

pierna, _f._, leg; á -- suelta, at one's ease; undisturbed; dormir á
suelta, to sleep soundly (_or_ deeply).

pieza, _f._, piece, part; animal, game; plantation, field.

pilar, _m._, pillar, post, column, support, abutment.

pilastra, _f._, pilaster.

pintar, to paint, picture, describe, depict.

pintor, _m._, painter.

pintoresco, -a, picturesque.

piqueta, _f._, pickax.

pisada, _f._, footstep, hoof-beat.

pisar, to tread, trample.

pista, _f._, scent, trail.

pizarra, _f._, slate.

pláceme, _m._, congratulation.

placer, _m._, pleasure, content(ment).

planta, _f._, plant; sole of the foot; poner en--, to put on foot; to
arrange (or execute).

plata, _f._, silver.

plataforma, _f._, platform.

plateado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ platear, silvered, silvery, pale.

platillo, _m._, little plate, dish; subject; hacer -- de, to converse
about.

playa, _f._, shore, strand; sin --, boundless.

plaza, _f._, place, post, square.

plazuela, _f._, small square.

plebe, _f._, people, common people, populace.

plegar, to curl, purse, curve.

plegaria, _f._, prayer, supplication.

plenitud, _f._, fullness, height.

pliegue, _m._, fold, plait, wave, ripple.

plomo, _m._, lead; color de--, leaden, lead-colored.

pluma, _f._, plume, feather, quill, pen.

población, _f._, town, village.

poblachón, _m._, big village.

poblado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ poblar, peopled, filled; full.

pobre, poor; _subst. m. or f._ poor man (_or_ woman).

pobrecito, _subst. m._, poor dear man; poor fellow.

poco, -a, little; _pl._, some, a few; á los --s minutos, within a few
minutes; _adv._, little, slightly, somewhat; un --, a little,
slightly, somewhat; á --, in a little while; soon; á -- de, shortly
after; -- á --, little by little, slowly, gently, softly, gradually;
-- más ó menos, a little more or less; approximately, nearly, about.

poder, to be able; can; apenas si pudiera, I could scarcely; como
pudo, as best he could; come mejor pudo, as well as possible; as well
as he could; no -- (por) menos de, cannot (help) but, cannot fail to;
_refl._, to be possible.

poder, _m._, power, possession.

poderoso, -a, powerful.

podredumbre, _f._, corruption.

poema, _m._, poem.

poesia, _f._, poetry.

poeta, _m._, poet.

polvo, _m._, dust.

porno, _m._, knob, handle, pommel.

pompa, _f._, pomp.

ponderación, _f._, consideration; exaggeration; laudation.

ponderar, to laud, extol, exaggerate.

poner, to put, place, take on, assume; -- atención, to pay attention;
-- en alarma, to alarm; -- encuidado, to cause apprehension (_or_
care); -- fuego, to set fire (to); -- por obra, to carry out, execute;
-- en planta, to put on foot; to arrange (_or_ execute); -- por
testigos, to call upon to witness; _refl._, to be, become; (of the
sun) to set; estar al -se, to be about to set; -se de bote en bote, to
get cram full; -- Be de pie, to stand (_or_ get) up; -se de punta, to
stand on end.

populacho, _m._, populace, rabble.

popular, popular, of (_or_ pertaining to) the populace.

poquito, -a, very little; -- á poco, gently, softly.

por, by, for, to, in order to, through, over, on, in, into, along,
about, on account of, from, out of, as, at, among, throughout; allí --
..., back therein...; de-si, by himself; for his own part; -- debajo,
beneath, under; -- decirlo así, so to speak; -- entre, between, among,
in through; -- eso, hence, therefore; -- fin, finally; -- fortuna,
fortunately; -- más que, however much; especially since; although; --
mí mismo, for myself; -- muchos que, however many; poner -- obra, to
carry out, execute; -- sí, of itself; of its own accord; -- ser, since
it was; -- tanto, therefore, for that reason, hence; -- la tierra, on
(_or_ along) the ground; -- tres veces, three times; -- lo visto,
evidently, apparently, visibly; -- ... que, however; -- lo que,
wherefore; ¿ -- qué? why?

porción, _f._, part, portion; una -- de años, a few years; a number
of years.

porche, _m._, portico, church porch, porch.

porfia, _f._, persistence; á --, in competition, in emulation.

pormenor, _m._, detail, minute account, incident.

poro, _m._, pore.

¿por qué? why?

porqué, _m._, reason, cause, reason why.

porque, for, because; so that, in order that; bien -- ... ó por ser,
whether because ... or because it was.

portada, _f._, portal, façade.

porte, _m._, bearing, deportment.

portento, _m._, prodigy, portent, micacle.

pórtico, _m._, portico, porch.

porvenir, _m._, future.

pos: en --, after, behind, in pursuit (de, of).

poscer, to possess.

posible, possible; en lo --, as much as possible; lo más --, as much
as possible; lo --, as much as possible.

posición, _f._, position, situation.

positivo, -a, positive.

posteriormente, afterwards, later.

postigo, _m._, door, postern.

postrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ postrar, prostrated, prostrate.

postre, last; á la --; at last, finally.

postrero (_or_ postrer), -a, last.

postres, _m. pl._, dessert.

poterna, _f._, postern, small back door (_or_ gate).

potro, _m._, colt, foal.

prbetico, -a, skilled, expert, practiced, skillful.

precaución, _f._, caution, precaution.

preceder, to precede.

precepto, _m._, order, command.

precioso, -a, precious, costly.

precipicio, _m._, precipice.

precipitación, _f._, precipitation, haste.

precisamente, exactly, precisely, just.

preciso, -a, necessary; es -- que, I (you, etc.) must. appear.

predicción, _f._, prediction, prophecy, warning.

predilecto, -a, favorite, beloved.

preferible, preferable.

preferir, to prefer.

pregunta, _f._, question, inquiry; hacer una --, to ask a question,
make an inquiry.

preguntar, to ask.

prelado, _m._, prelate.

preludio, _m._, prelude, forerunner, precursor.

premiar, to reward.

premio, _m._, reward; en --, as a reward.

prendas, _f. pl._, talents, accomplishments.

prender, to seize, take, arrest.

preocupar, to preoccupy, prepossess.

preparar, to prepare, make ready; _refl._, to be prepared, be (_or_
get) ready; to prepare.

presa, _f._, capture, prize; -- de, a prey to.

presagio, _m._, presage, omen, portent, token.

presbiterio, _m._, presbytery, chancel.

prescindir de, to omit, except, leave out of consideration.

presea, _f._, jewel, gem.

presencia, _f._, presence.

presenciar, to witness.

presentación, _f._, introduction, presentation.

presentar, to introduce, present, offer, hold out; _refl._, to be
present, present (_or_ show) oneself, appear.

presente, present; hacer --, to lay before, present, state; tener --,
to bear in mind, remember; _subst._ _m._, person present; present
(time).

presentir, to foresee, forebode, have a foreboding of.

presidio, _m._, jail, prison.

preso, -a, _pp. (irr.) of_ prender, seized.

prestar, to lend, give, furnish, pay; -- homenaje, to pay homage,
profess fealty; -- el oido, to pay attention; to listen (carefully).

preste, _m._, priest.

presteza, _f._, rapidity.

presumir, to presume, suppose, boast.

presunto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ presumir, presumed, supposed,
boasted.

presuroso, -a, hasty, quick, prompt, rapid, speedy; _adv._, speedily,
promptly, hurriedly.

pretendiente, _m._, aspirant, suitor.

pretil, _m._, railing, balustrade, battlement, breastwork.

prevenir, to warn, foresee, anticipate.

prez, _m. or f._, renown, glory.

primada, _m._, primate, archbishop; primatical church.

primavera, _f._, spring.

primero (_or_ primer), -a, first, former, best, only; _adv._, first,
before, rather, sooner.

primicia, _f._, first-fruits.

primogénito, _m._, heir (by primogeniture).

primor, _m._, beauty, charm; skill, dexterity.

principal, principal, chief, leading.

principio, _m._, beginning; á -- de, at the beginning of; early in;
dar --, to begin.

priora, _f._, prioress, superior.

prisa, _f._, haste, speed; de --, rapidly; más que de -- (_lit._ more
than rapidly), as rapidly as possible.

prisión, _f._, prison, dungeon.

prisionero, _m._, prisoner.

privar, to find general acceptance.

privilegio, _m._, privilege.

probable, probable.

probar, to prove, taste, swallow, try, test.

problema, _m._, problem, question.

procedencia, _f._, derivation, source.

proceder, to proceed.

procurar, to try, endeavor, manage, succeed.

prodigalidad, _f._, prodigality, profusion, extravagance.

prodigio, _m._, marvel, prodigy, miracle.

prodigioso, -a, marvelous, wonderful.

producir, to produce, make, arouse.

producto, _m._, product.

profanación, _f._, profanation.

profanar, to profane, disgrace, desecrate.

proferir, to proffer, utter.

profesión, _f._, profession, practice.

profesora, _f._, professor, teacher.

profeta, _m._, prophet.

profundamente, profoundly, deeply.

profundidad, _f._, depth.

profundo, -a, profound, deep; _subst. m. pl._ depths; hell.

profusión, _f._, profusion, lavishness.

prohibir, to forbid.

prolongado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ prolongar, prolonged, long.

prolongar, to prolong; _refl._, to be prolonged; to stretch out.

promesa, _f._, promise.

prometer, to promise.

promoción, _f._, promotion.

prontitud, _f._, promptness; con --, promptly, quickly.

pronto, -a, quick, prompt; _adv._, promptly, quickly, soon, too soon;
de --, suddenly, abruptly; tan -- ... como ..., now ... now ...

pronunciar, to utter.

propicio, -a, propitious.

propiedad, _f._, property.

propio, -a, own, self, very, proper, fitting, suitable, becoming; --
de, proper to, peculiar to, suited to, befitting, belonging to; amor
--, self-esteem, self-love, conceit, vanity.

proporción, _f._, proportion.

proposición, _f._, proposition, offer.

propósito, _m._, purpose, plan, design, intention; á --, suited,
suitable, desirable; by the way; apropos; á -- de, with regard to,
apropos of, speaking of.

prorrumpir, to break forth, burst out.

proseguir, to pursue, continue, remain, follow.

prosélito, _m._, proselyte.

protección, _f._, protection.

protector, _m._, protector, guardian.

proteger, to protect, guard.

proveer, to provide (á, for).

provenzal, Provencal, of (_or_ pertaining to) Provence.

proverbial, proverbial.

providencia, _f._, providence.

provincia, _f._, province, country.

provisto, -a, _pp. of_ proveer, provided.

provocar, to incite, spur on, challenge.

próximamente, approximately.

proximidad, _f._, proximity.

próximo, -a, next, near, very near, about, ready; -- á, about to;
ready to.

proyectarse, to project, be thrown.

proyecto, _m._, project, plan.

prudencia, _f._, prudence.

prueba, _f._ proof.

publico, -a, public, common; cosa

publica, well known, notorious.

pudor, _m._, shame, modesty.

pudrir, to rot, decay.

pueblecillo, _m._, small town, village.

pueblo, _m._, people, populace, village; gente del --, common people.

puente, _m._, bridge, drawbridge; -- levadizo, drawbridge.

pueril, puerile, childish.

puerta, _f._, door, gate, portal; doorway; llamar á la --, to knock
(at the door).

pues, _conj._, for, since; _interj._, then, well, therefore, why; --
bien, well, well then, very well, well now; -- nada, but no; not so.

puesto, -a, _pp. of_ poner, placed, put, granted; -- que, supposing
that, seeing that; since, because, forasmuch as

puesto, _m._, post, position, place, point, spot, seat.

pugnar, to fight, strive.

pujanza, _f._, power.

pulimentar, to polish.

pulular, to swarm.

punta, _f._, point, tip, end, sharp point; ponerse de --, to stand on
end.

puntiagudo, -a, sharp, pointed.

punto, _m._, point (of time or place), point, jot, moment, instant,
matter, object; estar á -- (de), to be ready (to); to be on the point
of, be about to; -- en boca, silence, hush; hasta el -- de, up to the
point of; until, till; al -- y hora de, on the stroke of, at exactly;
á -- de la media noche, at midnight precisely; at exactly twelve
o'clock at night; de --, see subir.

puñal, _m._, dagger, poniard.

puño, _m._, fist, cuff, wristband, hilt; como --s, as large as your
fist.

pupila, _f._, eye, pupil, sight

purgar, to purify, atone, expiate, purge, clear away.

purisimo, -a, _abs. super._ of puro, very (_or_ most) pure, purest,
immaculate.

puro, -a, pure, mere; de -- viejo, from sheer old age.

púrpura, _f._, purple, crimson.


Q


que, _rel._, who, which, that; el --, he who, that which, which; la
--, she who, that which, which; lo --, that which, what; á lo --, as
far as; from what; as; á lo -- parece, as it seems; evidently; lo --
esde, as for; as far as ... is (_or_ are) concerned; lo -- tiene --,
but; the fact is that; con --, therefore, wherefore, so then.

que, _adv._, as, than; tan ... --, as ... as.

que, _conj._, let, for, since, that; bien -- ... bien --, whether ...
or; either because ... or because; de --, of (_or_ at) the fact that;
that; (ello) es --, the fact is that; entonces --, then while (_or_
when); puesto --, since; -- lo creas o no, whether you believe it or
not; -- quieras -no, willy-nilly; no --, whilst; sin --, without; sino
--, but, but rather, except that; en tanto --, while; hasta tanto --,
until, until such time as; ya --, since.

¿qué? _interrog._) which? what? ¿á --? why? wherefore? ¿en --? in
what? how? why? ¿por --? why? ¿-- tal? how? ¿--se yo --? I know not
what; all sorts of things; ¿-- tiempo? how long?

¡qué! _exclam._) how! what! what a! ¡-- ... (_subst._) tan ...
(_adj._)! what a ... (_adj._) ... (_subst._,)!

quebrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ quebrar, broken, altered, rough, rocky,
uneven; tener la color quebrada, to have lost one's color; to be pale.

quebrar, to break, alter; _refl._, to break, be broken, be altered.

queda, _f._, curfew.

quedar, to remain, rest, be (_or_ become); -- en pie, to remain
standing; -- en silencio, to be silent; cuanto queda repetido, as has
been said; _refl._, to remain; to be.

queja, _f._, complaint, murmur, plaint, sighing, sigh, moaning, moan.

quejarse, to complain, grumble, clamor, lament.

quejido, _m._, complaint, moan.

quemar, to burn, scorch, inflame.

querer, to wish, desire, want, seek, like, demand, will, be willing;
¿qué queréis?, ¿qué quiere usarced? what can you expect? que quieras
que no, willy-nilly; no quiere permitir, will not permit; á éste
quiero á éste no quiero, without asking permission; whether or no; --
á, to love; -- decir, to mean; _refl._, to be desired, be desirable.

querido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ querer, liked, loved, beloved, dear; el mas
--, the favorite.

querubin, _m._, cherub.

quicio, _m._, hinge; (_here_) crack, opening.

quiebra, _f._, crack, opening, fissure.

quien, _rel._, who, whom, one who, him who, whoever; á fe de -- soy,
on my honor; on the word of a gentleman; ¡por -- soy! on my word (of
honor).

¿quién? who?

quiera. See como, _also_ adonde.

quietecito, -a, very quiet, very peaceful.

quieto, -a, quiet, calm, peaceful.

quietud, _f._, quiet, tranquillity.

quimérico, -a, chimerical, fantastic.

quince, fifteen.

quinto, -a, fifth.

quitar, to take away, take off, deprive of, ward off, cut off, remove.

quizás, perhaps.


R


racimo, _m._, bunch, cluster.

radiar, to shine, gleam.

ráfaga, _f._, gust, gale, blast, rush of wind (_or_ air).

Raimundo, _m._, Raymond.

raíz, _f._, root.

rama, _f._, branch.

ramaje, _m._, branches.

ramillete, _m._, nosegay, bouquet.

rapidez, _f._, rapidity, celerity.

rápido, -a, rapid, fleet, swift.

rapto, _m._, ecstasy, rapture.

raro, -a, rare, strange, remarkable.

rascar, to scratch.

rasgar, to rend, tear asunder.

rastrear, to go spying; to creep (_or_ crawl) (_lit._, to fly low).

rastrero, -a, cringing.

rastrillo, _m._, portcullis.

rastro, _m._, track(s), trace(s), scent, taste.

rato, _m._, moment, short time, time, while; largo --, for a long
time; un gran --, a long time.

raya, _f._, stroke, dash, line, streak; boundary, frontier.

rayarse, to break (of dawn); to dawn.

rayo, _m._, ray, beam; lightning, thunderbolt.

raza, _f._, race, family.

razón, _f._, reason, cause, account; dar -- de, to give an account of;
to inform regarding; en -- á, by reason of; on account of.

real, royal, real, actual.

realidad, _f._, reality.

realizar, to realize, execute, form, accomplish.

rebaño, _m._, flock of sheep.

rebelde, rebellious, rebel.

rebosar, to overflow.

rebullirse, to move restlessly, be agitated.

recalcar, to emphasize, stress.

recibir, to receive.

reciente (_or_ recién), recent, fresh; recién venido, recent arrival.

recientemente, recently.

recinto, _m._, precinct(s), inclosure, place.

recitar, to recite, speak.

reclamar, to reclaim.

reclinar, to recline, lay, lean; _refl._, to recline.

reclinatorio, _m._, prie-dieu, prayerdesk.

recobrar, to recover, regain, obtain, assume again, resume, take up
again.

recoger, to take up, pick up, take back, receive.

recogimiento, _m._, abstraction, concentration, meditation, reverence,
modesty; examination.

reconocer, to recognize, acknowledge, inspect.

recordar, to recall, remind, recollect, remember, call to mind.

recorrer, to run over, pass through, traverse, search, scour, overrun,
roam about; have recourse (to).

recostado, -a, _pp. of_ recostar, reclining, leaning, resting.

recuerdo, _m._, remembrance, recollection, memory.

recuperar, to regain.

recurso, _m._, resource.

rechazar, to repel, drive back.

rechinar, to creak, grate.

red, _f._, net, head-dress.

redención, _f._, redemption.

Redentor, _m._, Redeemer.

redimir, to redeem, ransom, purchase exemption from, liberate, set
free (for a price).

redonda, _f._, circle, round, neighborhood; veinte leguas á la --,
within a radius of twenty (Spanish) leagues.

redondo, -a, round, well-molded, well-formed.

reducirse, to be reduced (_or_ confined); to consist (a, in); to limit
oneself (á, to).

referir, to relate, narrate, tell, mention, describe, report; _refl._,
to refer, have to do, consist; ¿á qué se refiere? wherein consists?

reflejar, to reflect; _refl._, to reflect, be reflected.

reflejo, _m._, reflection.

refrán, _m._, refrain; saying, adage.

refrenar, to check.

refrescar, to freshen, refresh, cool.

refriega, _f._, encounter, affray.

refugiarse, to take refuge.

refugio, _m._, refuge.

refunfutiar, to snarl, growl.

regalar, to regale, delight with.

regalo, _m._, present, gift.

regazo, _m._, lap, embrace.

región, _f._, precinct, region, place, space, tract.

registro, _m._, stop (of an organ).

regla, _f._, rule; de nuestra --, of our order.

regocijado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ regocijar, rejoicing, joyful, merry.

regocijo, _m._, rejoicing, joy, pleasure, mirth, hilarity, merriment,
amusement.

regular, common, ordinary.

rehundir, to sink, bury.

rehusar, to refuse, decline.

reina, _f._, queen.

reinar, to reign.

reino, _m._, kingdom, dominion.

reir (_or_ rierse), to laugh; to smile; -- de, to laugh at; dar que --
(con), to ridicule, make sport (of), make a laughingstock (of); y se
le rieron en sus barbas, and they laughed in his face; reirse en la
nariz, to laugh in one's face; romper á --, to burst out laughing.

reiterar, to repeat, reiterate.

rejilla, _f._, bar.

relación, _f._, narration, story, narrative, account; relation.

relacionarse, to be (_or_ become) related (_or_ connected).

relámpago, _m._, flash, flash of lightning, lightning.

relampaguear, to flash.

relatar, to relate; las relataban, would tell of hiss deeds.

relate, _m._, narration, narrative, story.

religión, _f._, religion, Christianity.

religioso, -a, religious; _subst. m. and f._, monk, nun.

relinchar, to neigh.

reliquia, _f._, relic.

reloj, _m._, watch, clock

rellano, _m._, plateau.

remanso, _m._, still water, water caught and held in the little bays
along a river-bank.

remate, _m._, end, destination, conclusion.

remedio, _m._, remedy, cure.

remolino, _m._, whirlwind, whirl, gust.

remontar, to remount, go back, go up; -- la corriente del río, to go
up stream; _refl._, to climb; remount, ascend, rise.

remoto, -a, remote, distant, far off, ancient.

removerse, to move, move about.

rencor, _m._, rancor, animosity, grudge.

rendimiento, _m._, submission.

rendir, to subject, overcome; _refl._, to yield, give way, bend down.

renegar, to curse, swear (de, at).

renunciar, to renounce, give up, refrain.

reo, _m._, criminal, accused.

reparar, to repair, observe, notice.

repartir, to distribute, divide.

repente; de --, suddenly.

repentino, -a, sudden, unexpected.

repetir, to repeat; _refl._, to be repeated; to reverberate.

repicar, to chime, ring, peal.

repique, _m._, chime, peal.

replegarse, to bend back, wind, coil, make a detour, be centered.

reponerse, to recover.

reposado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ reposar, calm.

reposar, to rest, repose.

reposo, _m._, rest, repose, sleep.

representación, _f._, representation; -- de, representing; in the name
of.

representar, to represent; _refl._, to be represented; to appear.

reprimir, to repress, restrain.

reproducir, to reproduce, reflect.

reptil, _m._ reptile.

repuesto, -a, _pp. of_ reponerse, recovered.

repugnancia, _f._, repugnance, aversion.

repugnante, repugnant, revolting.

requerir, to require, demand, seek, request.

res, _f._, head of cattle, etc., animal, game, deer.

resbalar, to glide, steal, slip; _refl._, to glide, slip, slide,
steal; -se á uno un pie, to take a false step; to slip.

resignar, to resign; _refl._, to be (_or_ become) resigned; to resign
oneself.

resina, _f._, resin; teas de --, pine (or resinous) torches.

resistir, to resist, baffle, oppose, endure (it); _refl._, to resist,
refuse.

resolución, _f._, resolution, decision.

resolver, to resolve, solve, determine; _refl._, to agree, decide.

resonar, to resound, clang.

resorte, _m._, spring.

respecto, _m._, respect, regard, relation; -- à, with respect to.

respetable, respectable, influential, venerable, estimable.

respetar, to respect.

respeto, _m._, respect, esteem.

respetusamente, respectfull, with respect.

respetuoso, -a, respectful.

respiración, _f._, respiration, breathing.

respirar, to breathe.

resplandecer, to glisten, shine, gleam, glitter.

resplandeciente, resplendent, shining.

resplandor, _m._, glow, splendor, light, gleam, flash, brightness,
reflection.

responder, to reply, answer, respond.

respuesta,_f._ reply.

restar, to remain.

resto, _m._, rest, remainder, remains; _pl._, remains, rest,
remainder; ruins.

restregar, to rub.

resucitar, to resuscitate, revive.

resuelto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ resolver, resolved, determined; ready,
prepared.

resultado, _m._, result, outcome.

resultar, to result.

retablo, _m._, reredos, retable, altarpice, altar-screen.

retirar, to retire, withdraw; _refl._, to retire, withdraw.

retorcer, to twist, wind, turn; _refl._, to twist, wind, writhe, flow
tortuously, roll.

retorcido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ retorcer, twisted, rolled, rolling,
winding, undulating, gnarled.

retozar, to flit, hover, play, sport, sparkle.

retraido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ retraer, restrained, repressed, shrinking.

retratar, to portray, depict, mirror, reflect.

retumbar, to resound.

reunión, _f._, reunion, gathering, party.

reunir, to unite, bring together, join, collect; _refl._, to meet,
unite, assemble, collect; -se á, to join; -se con, to join, associate
with.

revelación, _f._, revelation, confession.

revelar, to reveal, manifest.

reventarse, to burst, split; (_vulgar_) to die.

revés, _m._, reverse, opposite, back al --, backwards.

revestir, to deck, adorn, put (or take) on again; to be dressed (or
clothed).

revolcar, to hurl, overturn; _refl._, to wallow, roll about, writhe.

revolotear, to flutter (_or_ fly) about; to flutter, hover; _subst.
m._, fluttering.

revolver, to revolve, turn over (in one's mind), consider; _refl._, to
roll, to stir, to move about.

revuelta, _f._, confusion, consternation, turn, turning, winding.

revuelto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ revolver, huddled together, intermingled,
pell mell, rumpled, tossed, disordered, intricate, winding.

rey, _m._, king, monarch; -- de armas, king-at-arms; los reyes, the
king and queen.

reyerta, _f._, dispute, difference.

rezador, apt to pray, given to much praying.

rezar, to pray, recite prayers.

rezo, _m._, prayer.

riachuelo, _m._, rivulet, small stream, stream.

ribazo, _m._, sloping bank; ditch.

ribera, _f._, bank, shore.

ribete, _m._, ribbon, shred, streak, line.

ricamente, richly.

rico, -a, rich, fine, delicate, costly.

ridiculo, -a, ridiculous.

rielar (_poet._), to glisten, glimmer; to shine with a tremulous
light.

rienda, _f._, rein; _pl._, reins, bridle.

rigido, -a, rigid.

rigor, _m._, heat, rigor, necessity; de --, necessary, required.

rima, _f._, rhyme; _pl._, lyric poems.

rincón, _m._, corner, angle.

río, _m._, river.

riqufsimo, -a, _abs. super. of_ rico, very rich.

risa, _f._, laugh, laughter.

risueño, -a, smiling, laughing, charming.

ritmo, _m._, rhythm.

rival, _m._, rival.

rivalizar, to be rivals; to vie (entre sí, with each other).

rizar, to curl, crisp, ripple.

rizo, _m._, curl.

roca, _f._, rock, cliff.

roce, _m._, touch, rustle, rustling.

rocín, _m._, hack, horse, nag.

rocío, _m._, dew.

rodar, to roll, move along, rotate, revolve, roll down hill.

rodear, to surround, gather round, girdle; _refl._, to move (_or_
wander) about.

rodeo, _m._, circumlocution.

rodilla, _f._, knee; de --s, kneeling.

roer, to gnaw, consume.

rogar, to beg, pray, implore, beseech.

rojizo, -a, reddish.

rojo, -a, red.

romance, _m._, Spanish (language); romance, (historic) ballad.

romeral, _m._, a place abounding in rosemary.

romero, _m._, pilgrim.

romo, -a, obtuse, blunt, flat.

romper, to break, dissipate, fracture, tear, rend, part; -- á reir, to
burst out laughing; al -- el día, at break of day; at dawn; _refl._,
to break.

roncar, to snore.

ronco, -a, hoarse, rough.

ronda, _f._, round; circular dance, dance; andar á la --, to go the
rounds; to go around.

ropa, _f._, cloth, garment, clothes, robe, gown, loose garment worn
over the clothes.

ropaje, _m._, apparel, drapery, garment.

ropilla, _f._, jacket, kind of short jacket with double sleeves, the
outer ones hanging loose.

rosa, _f._, rose; color de --, rose-colored; de --, rosy,
rose-colored.

rosado, -a, rose-colored, rosy, flushed.

rostrillo, _m._, veil; head-dress.

rostro, _m._, face, countenance; dar á algún en el -- con, to cast in
one's face.

roto, -a, _pp. of_ romper, broken, pierced.

rozar, to graze, touch slightly, be on a level (con, with).

rubí, _m._, ruby.

rubio, -a, fair, blond, ruddy, golden.

ruborizarse, to blush.

rudo, -a, rough, hard, severe.

ruego, _m._, request, entreaty.

rugido, _m._, roar, roaring.

rugir, to roar.

ruido, _m._, sound, noise.

ruidoso, -a, noisy, loud.

ruin, _m._, wicked (mean _or_ infamous) person; en hablando del -- de
Roma, cátale aquí que asoma, speak of the devil and he will appear.

ruina, _f._, ruin; _pl._, ruins.

ruinoso, -a, dilapidated, in ruins, ruinous.

ruiseñor, _m._, nightingale.

rumor, _m._, noise, murmur, sound, rumor, rustle.

rústico, _m._, rustic (fellow), peasant.


S


sábado, _m._, Saturday.

sábana, _f._, sheet, shroud, plain.

saber, to know, know how, be aware, be able; can; á no --, had I not
known; ¿qué sé yo qué? I know not what; all sorts of things.

saber, _m._, knowledge; el gay -- poetry, the art of poetry.

sabido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sabet, learned, educated.

sabiduría, _f._, knowledge, wisdom.

sabiendas: á --, knowingly, consciously, wittingly, with knowledge of.

sabor, _m._, relish, taste, savor, pleasure; á --, at pleasure, with
relish (_or_ enjoyment); á todo --, fully; with profound delight.

saborear, to relish, enjoy.

sabroso, -a, savory, delicious.

sacar, to draw, draw out, take out, arouse, bring out, rouse, put out,
remove, draw, snatch, derive.

sacerdote, _m._, priest.

saco, _m._, sack, bag; echar en -- roto, to be heedless of; not to
take advantage of; to forget.

sacrilegio, _m._, sacrilege, sacrilegious act.

sacrflego, -a, sacrilegious.

sacristía, _f._, sacristy, vestry.

sacudir, to shake, shake off.

saeta, _f._, arrow, dart.

saetera, _f._, loophole.

sagrado, -a, sacred, consecrated.

Sagrario, _m._, sacrarium, the interior part of a church in which are
kept such sacred things as relics, etc.

sainete, _m._, comedietta, farce.

sala, _f._, hall.

salida, _f._, departure, exit, sally.

salir, to go out, come out, issue, sally, leave; -- de, to go from
(_or_ out of); to go beyond; _refl_,, to go out, come out.

salmo, _m._, psalm.

Salomón, _m._, Solomon.

salomónico, -a, Solomonic, of (_or_ pertaining to) Solomon king of
Israel; columnilla salomónica, little twisted column.

salón, _m._, hall, drawing-room, parlor.

salpicar, to scatter.

saltar, to spring, leap.

salto, _m._, spring, leap, bound, jump.

saludable, salutary, wholesome.

saludar, to greet, salute, acclaim, hail.

saludo, _m._, salute, bow, greeting.

salva, _f._, burst.

Salvación, _f._, salvation, safety.

Salvador, _m._, Savior.

salvaje, savage, barbarous.

salvar, to save, cross, pass over, leap over.

salve (_Latin_), hail, first word of prayer 'Salve Regina,' 'Hail,
Holy Queen.'

salvo, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ salvar, saved; safe; _adv._, save,
saving, excepting.

san. See santo.

San Bartolomé, _m._, Saint Bartholomew; church of Saint Bartholomew.

sandez, f, folly; foolish act (_or_ speech).

San Felipe, _m._, Saint Philip.

sangre, _f._, blood.

sangriento, -a, bloody, bleeding, covered with blood.

San Huberto, _m._, Saint Hubert.

San Juan, _m._, Saint John.

San Martin, _m._, Saint Martin.

San Miguel, _m._, Saint Michael.

sano, -a, sound.

San Pacomio, _m._, Saint Pachomius.

San Pedro, _m._, Saint Peter.

San Román, _m._, Saint Romain.

San Saturio, _m._, Saint Saturius.

Santa Inés, _f._, Saint Agnes; church of Saint Agnes.

santamente, piously.

Santa Teresa, _f._, Saint Theresa.

santero, _m._, hermit; caretaker of a sanctuary.

Santiago, _m._, Saint James.

sautidad, _f._, sanctity; tener en olor de --, to hold (_or_ consider)
as a saint.

sautiguarse, to cross oneself, make the sign of the cross.

santisimo, -a, (_abs. super. of_ santo, most holy.

santo (or san), -a, saint, sainted, holy; horror, awe, reverential
fear; -- Patrono, patron saint; Viernes Santo, Good Friday; _subst. m.
and f._, saint; llegar y besar el --, to succeed in a brief space of
time; to find good fortune quickly.

santuario, _m._, sanctuary.

sapo, _m._, toad, large toad.

saquear, to plunder, pillage.

sarao, _m._, ball, evening party.

sargento, _m._, sergeant; -- aposentador, quartermaster-sergeant.

Satanás, _m._, Satan.

satisfacer, to satisfy, gratify, answer.

satisfactorio, -a, satisfactory.

satisfecho, -a, _pp. of_ satisfacer, satisfied, gratified.

sauce, _m._, willow.

saúco, _m._, elder, elder wood.

saya, _f._, petticoat, skirt.

sazón, _f._, time, season, opportunity; á la --, at that time; then.

se, himself, herself, itself, themselves; one another, each other, to
one another, to each other; _equivalent to the passive in English, or
to the impersonal construction 'there ...'._

sé. _See_ saber.

sea. See ser; -- ... --, whether ... or; no -- que, for fear that;
lest.

secarse, to dry up, wither (away).

seco, -a, dry, hard, metallic, bony, lean, thin, ardent, burning.

secreto, _m._, secret.

secuaz, _m._, follower, attendant, retainer.

sed, _f._, thirst.

seda, _f._, silk.

seducir, to entice, attract.

segar, to cut (_or_ mow) down; to crop.

seguimiento, _m._, following, train, suite, pursuit.

seguir, to follow, continue; -- con, to follow, go along with,
accompany; -- con la vista, to look after, to watch.

según, according to (_or_ as); as, just as; the way, judging from the
way.

segundo, -a, second; _subst. m._, second (of time).

seguramente, surely, indeed.

segurarse, to assure oneself, be assured; to assert.

seguro, -a, secure, sure, safe, certain; dar por --, to assure; to
assert; de --, assuredly.

seis, six.

sello, _m._, seal.

semblante, _m._, face.

sembrar, to sow; to dot, strew.

semejante, similar, like, such, such a, same; -- á, like, similar to.

semejar, to be like (_or_ similar to); to resemble.

semicírculo, _m._, semicircle.

sencillo, -a, simple, plain.

senda, _f._, path, by-path, foot-path.

sendero, _m._, path, by-path, foot-path.

seno, _m._, breast, bosom, heart; womb, depth.

sensación, _f._, sensation.

sentado, -a, _pp. of_ sentarse, seated, sitting; estar --, to be
seated.

sentarse, to seat oneself, be seated, sit (down).

sentencia, _f._, sentence.

sentido, _m._, sense, consciousness; falto de --, unconscious.

sentimiento, _m._, sentiment, feeling.

sentir, to feel, perceive, hear; no se siente una mosca (_lit._, a fly
cannot be heard), you can hear a pin fall.

seña, _f._, sign, signal, motion, gesture.

señal, _f._, sign, signal; que hacían -es de ojeo, which were blowing
to start up the game.

señalar, to mark, signalize, appoint, determine, fix upon, point out,
indicate.

Señor, _m._, Lord, God.

señor, _m._, lord, gentleman, nobleman, man, knight, sir; pues, sí --,
yes sir-ee, yes indeed sir.

señora, _f._, lady, madam, mistress; Nuestra Señora, Our Lady
(appellation of the Virgin Mary).

señorial, seigniorial; of (_or_ pertaining to) the lord of a manor.

señorío, _m._, seigniory, domains, dominion.

señorito, _m._, young gentleman.

separado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ separar, separated, separate.

separar, to separate, divide; -- se de, to separate from; to leave.

sepulcral, sepulchral; of (_or_ pertaining to) a sepulcher (_or_
tomb).

sepulcro, _m._, sepulcher, tomb, grave.

sepulturero, _m._, grave-digger.

séquito, _m._, suite, escort.

ser, to be, become; á no --, unless it be; á no -- por, were it not
for; -- cosa de, to be sufficient cause to, be enough to; de no --, if
not; no -- cosa, not to be small (_or_ few in number), to be large
(_or_ numerous); la cosa no era para menos, nothing less could be
expected; por --, since it was; sea, be it so; como no sea, unless it
be; no sea que, for fear that; lest; sea ... sea, whether ... or;
será, it probably is (_or_ was); que no será dificil, which it easily
may; será que, it is probable that; ¿qué ha sido de él? what has
become of it?

ser, _m._, being.

serafín, _m._, seraph.

sereno, -a, serene, unclouded.

serie, _f._, series.

serio, -a, serious.

serpear, to circle, wind, glide.

serpentear, to wind.

serpiente, _f._, serpent.

serrallo, _m._, seraglio, harem.

serreta, _f._, nose-band, head-stall.

servicio, _m._, service; household.

servidor, _m._, servant; -- de á pie, footman.

servidumbre, _f._, servants, attendants.

servir, to serve, be of service (_or_ use), avail, act; -- de, to
serve (_or_ act) as; con el diablo no sirven (juegos), (tricks) don't
work with the devil; _refl._, to deign, be pleased.

sesos, _m. pl._, brain, brains; devanarse los --, to rack one's
brains.

sestear, to take a siesta, take an after-dinner nap (_or_ rest).

setenta, seventy.

severo, -a, severe, stern, strict.

sevillano, -a, of (_or_ pertaining to) Seville.

si, if; why, indeed; cual --, as if; -- bien, although, even if; --
... que, however; -- lo decía yo, indeed I told you so; just as I told
you; apenas --, hardly, barely; apenas -- pudiera, I could scarcely;
-- ya, if indeed; -- ya no, unless.

sí, himself, herself, itself, one's self, themselves; de por --, by
himself, for his own part; entre --, to himself, etc.

sí, certainly, yes, indeed, of-course; pues, -- señor, yes sir-ee, yes
indeed sir.

siempre, always, still; -- que, every time that; whenever.

sién, _f._, temple.

sierpe, _f._, serpent.

siesta, _f._, siesta, after-dinner rest (_or_ nap).

siete, seven.

sigilo, _m._, secrecy.

siglo, _m._, century.

significative, -a, significant.

signo, _m._, sign.

siguiente, following, next.

silbar, to whistle, hiss.

silbido, _m._, hiss, whistle.

silencio, _m._, silence.

silencioso, -a, silent, deserted, mute.

silfo, _m._, sylph, fairy.

silueta, _f._, silhouette.

silvestre, wild, uncultivated.

silla, _f._, seat, see, diocese.

sillar, _m._, hewn stone.

sillería, _f._, seat, stall(s); 'hewn stone.

sillón, in., armchair.

sima, _f._, abyss, gulf.

símbolo, _m._, symbol.

simple, foolish, crazy; _subst. m._, simpleton, fool.

simplemente, simply.

simplificar, to simplify.

sin, without; -- duda, doubtless; -- ejemplar, unprecedented; --
embargo, however, nevertheless, notwithstanding; -- que, without.

singular, singular, strange.

sinnúmero, _m._, infinite number.

sino, but (_after a negative_); but rather; if not, except; no tan
sólo, -- que, not only, but also; -- que, but, but rather, except
that.

sinuosidad, _f._, turn, bend, winding, sinuosity, curve.

siquiera, even, at least, unless, even though; ni oyó --, he did not
even hear; ni tan --, not even, not so much as.

sisar, to pilfer, cheat.

sitial, _m._, seat, chair.

sitio, _m._, place, point, site, seat.

situación, _f._, state, condition, situation, position.

situado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ situar, situated, situate.

situarse, to locate oneself, take up one's position.

soberanamente, supremely, particularly.

soberano, -a, sovereign, supreme.

sobra, _f._, surplus, excess; de --, over and above; andar más de --,
to be more in excess.

sobrado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sobrar, enough and to spare; _here_}
enough, sufficient.

sobre, on, over, upon, about; -- todo, above all, especially.

sobrecoger, to surprise; _refl._, to be surprised, be overtaken, be
seized upon; -se temeroso, to be seized with fear.

sobrehumano, -a, superhuman.

sobremanera, beyond measure, exceedingly.

sobrenatural, supernatural.

sobrenombre, _m._, nickname.

sobreponerse á, to be superior to; to surpass, drown.

sobresaltado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sobresaltar, startled, frightened,
surprised; with a start.

sobresalto, _m._, surprise.

socorro, _m._, succor, assistance.

sochantre, _m._, sub-chanter, precentor's deputy.

sofocado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sofocar, smothered, stifled, breathless,
out of breath.

sol, _m._, sun.

soldado, _m._, soldier.

soledad, _f._, solitude, solitary place, waste, wilderness.

solemne, solemn.

solemnidad, _f._, solemnity.

soler, to be accustomed, be wont.

solfa, _f._, harmony, music; esto de la --, the art of music.

solicitud, _f._, solicitude, care, concern.

solio, _m._, canopy.

solitario, -a, solitary.

solo, -a, alone, sole, solitary, single, mere, deserted; á solas,
alone.

sólo, only, solely; no tan -, sino que, not only, but also.

soltar, to let loose, unfasten, untie, let go, loose, set on; _refl._,
to be loose; to fly (flow _or_ wave).

solución, _f._, solution.

sollozante, sobbing.

sollozar, to sob.

sollozo, _m._, sob.


sombra, _f._, shade, shadow sombrear, to shade, shadow, darken,
obscure, overshadow.

sombrio, -a, somber, dark, gloomy.

son, _m._, sound; motive; en (_or_ á) -- de guerra, for the purpose of
war.

sonaja, _f._, sonaja, kind of timbrel, a rustic musical instrument
made of a thin strip of wood about four inches wide brought round in
the shape of a tube or drum, and having small metal discs fixed in
holes at regular intervals like those of a tambourine. It is generally
held in the right hand and struck with the left.

sonante, resounding, sonorous, sounding.

sonar, to sound, ring in one's ears, echo, resound, strike.

sonido, _m._, sound, noise.

sonoro, -a, loud, sonorous.

sonreir (or sonreirse), to smile.

sonrisa, _f._, smile.

sonar, to dream, dream of, be troubled with dreams; -- con, to dream
of.

soplar, to blow.

soplo, _m._, breath, blast, gust, puff.

sopor, _m._, drowsiness, sleepiness.

soportable, endurable.

sordamente, dully.

sordo, -a, dull, muffled, low, deaf.

sorprender, to surprise, astonish, discover, come upon.

sorpresa, _f._, surprise; marchando de -- en --, ever more and more
surprised.

sortilegio, _m._, sorcery, charm.

sospechar, to suspect.

sostener, to sustain, hold up, support, prolong.

soto, _m._, grove, thicket, forest.

su, his, her, its, their, your, one's.

suave, soft, gentle, smooth, delicate, sweet.

suavemente, softly, gently, sweetly.

suavidad, _f._, softness, delicacy, sweetness.

súbdito, _m._, subject.

subir, to ascend, rise, mount; -- de punto, to increase; ir subiendo
de punto, to increase, keep increasing.

súbito, -a, sudden.

subsistir, to exist, remain.

subterráneo, -a, subterranean; _subst._ _m._, vault, cave, dungeon.

suceder, to succeed, result, happen, take place, be the matter; -- á,
to succeed, take the place of.

suceso, _m._, event, incident, result, success.

sudario, _m._, shroud.

sudor, _m._, sweat, perspiration.

suelo, _m._, ground, floor.

suelto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ soltar, detached, loose, flying,
free, flowing; á pierna suelta, at one's ease; undisturbed, dormir á
pierna suelta, to sleep soundly.

sueño, _m._, sleep, dream.

suerte, _f._, lot, fate; charm, spell.

suficiente, sufficient, enough; es lo--, it is enough; it is
sufficient cause.

sufrir, to suffer, endure.

sugerir, to suggest.

sujetar, to subject, hold, subdue, overcome, restrain.

sujeto, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ sujetar, fastened, fixed, held, set.

sumergido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sumergir, submerged, buried.

sumergir, to submerge, immerse, plunge; _refl._, to submerge oneself;
to dive.

sumido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ sumirse, sunk, plunged, sunken.

sumirse, to sink, plunge, be sunk.

sumo, -a, highest, greatest, very great.

suntuoso, -a, sumptuous.

superficie, _f._, surface.

superior, superior.

superstición, _f._, superstition.

supersticioso, -a, superstitious.

suplicante, suppliant, imploring.

suplicio, _m._, execution.

suposición, _f._, supposition, guess, surmise.

surcar, to plow, furrow, divide.

surco, _m._ furrow, track, rut.

¡sus! come! courage! ho! on!

suscribir, to subscribe, yield.

suspender, to suspend, interrupt, discontinue; to hold in suspense, to
amaze.

suspendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ suspender, suspended; hanging; in
suspense, anxious.

suspensión, _f._, pause, suspense.

suspenso, -a, _adj. pp. (irr.) of_ suspender, surprised, hesitant.

suspicaz, suspicious.

suspirar, to sigh.

suspiro, _m._, sigh.

sustentar, to sustain.

sustituir, to replace.

susto, _m._, fright, terror, fear; dar --, to frighten.

sustraer, to withdraw, separate; _refl._, to withdraw, retire.

susurrar, to whisper.

susurro, _m._, whisper, whispering.

suyo, -a, his, hers, its, theirs, yours; el (_or_ lo) --, la suya,
his, his own, etc.


T


tabernáculo, _m._, tabernacle.

tabla, _f._, board, panel.

tablero, _m._, board, plank.

taciturno, -a, taciturn, silent, melancholy.

tafilete, _m._, morocco (leather).

tal, so, such, such a; -- cual, such as; ¿qué --? how? -- vez,
perhaps, perchance.

talabarte, _m._, sword-belt.

talante, _m._, manner, will, disposition; mal--, ill humor.

talón, _m._, heel; andar á los --es, to follow upon one's heels; to
follow closely.

tallar, to carve.

tallo, _m._, shoot, sprout.

tamaño, -a, large, very large; _subst. m._, size.

tambalear, to stagger, reel.

también, also, likewise.

tampoco, either, neither, nor, either; ni ... --, nor ..., either;
neither.

tan, so, as, as much, such, such a (_or_ an); --... como, as... as; --
pronto ... como ..., now ... now...; -- ... que, as ... as; ¡qué ...
(_subst._) -- ... (_adj._)! what a ... (_adj._) ... (_subst._)! mi --
siquiera, not even, not so much as; no -- solo ... sino que, not only
... but also.

tanto, -a, so much, as much; _pl._, so many, as many; _adv._, so (_or_
as) much; meanwhile; -- como, as much as; -- os da de, you think as
highly of; en --, so, to such a degree; in the meanwhile; en -- que,
while; hasta -- que, until; until such time as; por --, therefore,
for that reason, hence; un --, a little; somewhat.

tañer, (of bells) to ring, toll.

tapar, to cover, conceal, cover up, stop up.

tapia, _f._, wall.

tapiz, _m._, hanging, tapestry, carpet, rug.

tardar, to delay, be late, be slow, be long.

tarde, _f._, afternoon, evening; á la --, in the afternoon; _adv._,
late; muy de -- en --, very seldom.

te, thee, you, to thee, to you.

tea, _f._, torch, piece of resinous wood.

teatro, _m._, scene, stage, theater.

tecla, _f._, key (of a musical instrument).

techado, _m._, roof, shelter.

techo, _m._, roof.

tejado, _m._, tiled roof.

tejer, to weave, spin, devise.

tela, _f._, cloth, garment.

tema, _m._, theme, topic, subject; cada loco con su --, everybody
(_lit._, every lunatic) has his hobby.

temblar, to tremble.

temblor, _m._, trembling.

tembloroso, -a, trembling, tremulous.

temer, to fear.

temeroso, -a, fearful; timid, timorous; sobrecogerse --, to be seized
with fear.

temible, dreadful.

temido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ temer, dreaded, fearful, dreadful.

temor, _m._, fear, fright, dread.

témpano, _m._, mass of ice, ice-field, ice-mountain, iceberg.

tempestad, _f._, tempest, storm, shower.

templado, -a, _adj. pp. of_ templar, tempered, softened, soft, gentle,
calm.

templar, to temper; to tune.

templo, _m._, temple, church, cathedral.

tenaz, tenacious, firm, constant, fixed.

tenaza, _f._, claw, talon.

tender, to stretch, stretch out, extend, direct, draw back, raise,
draw, aim, cast; -- una mirada, to take a look; to look; to glance; --
la vista, to cast a glance, direct one's glance.

tendido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ tender, stretched out, lying, prostrate;
_adv._, extensively, in detail.

tener, to have, hold, keep, take, hold out, lead, be the matter; --
empeño, to desire earnestly; -- en cuenta, to take into account; to
consider; -- ganas, to have a mind (de, to); no -- inconveniente, not
to consider improper; to have no objection; -- lugar, to take place;
to happen; -- miedo, to be afraid; -- noticia de, to be informed of;
-- por, to consider; -- presente, to bear in mind, remember; -- que,
to have to, be obliged to, should; lo que tiene que le preparan una
buena, the fact is that they are preparing for him a warm reception;
que de todo tenían menos de artistas ó arqueólogos, who were anything
but artists or archaeologists.

tentación, _f._, temptation.

tenue, thin, tenuous, light, delicate, soft.

teñir, to tinge, dye, stain, tint.

Teobaldo, _m._, Theobald.

tercero, -a, third.

terciar, to intervene (as a third person).

terciopelo, _m._, velvet.

terminar, to terminate, end, settle, arrive at the end of.

término, _m._ limit, boundary, goal, destination, term, terminal,
termination; llevar á --, to succeed, carry out, perform; en estos
--s, in these words; as follows.

ternura, _f._, tenderness, love; con --, lovingly, tenderly.

terrenal, earthly, of the earth, terrestrial.

terreno, _m._, ground, space, (limited) area; land, field; way,
distance; cortar --, to make a short cut; to shorten the way (_or_
distance).

terrible, terrible.

territorio, _m._, territory, country.

terror, _m._, terror.

terso, -a, smooth, polished, glossy.

tesoro, _m._, treasure, wealth.

testificar, to attest.

testigo, _m._, witness; poner por --s, to call to witness; to call
upon to witness.

testimonio, _m._, testimony, evidence.

tez, _f._, complexion, skin.

tí, thee, you.

tía, _f._, aunt; old woman.

tibiamente, weakly.

tiempo, _m._, time; á un --, at once; at the same time; antes de --,
prematurely; before it was ripe; de algún --, for some time; en un --,
once upon a time; ¿qué --? how long?

tienta, _f._, probing, feeling; á --s, by touching, groping, in the
dark; stealthily.

tierno, -a, tender, affectionate.

tierra, _f._, earth, land, soil, ground; en --, on the ground; por la
--, on (_or_ along) the ground.

timbalero, _m._, kettle-drummer, drummer.

timbre, _m._, crest (of a coat of arms).

tímidamente, timidly.

tímido, -a, timid.

tiniebla, _f._, shadow, shade, darkness, veil; _pl._, darkness,
shadow, shade.

tirante, _m._, suspension chain.

tirar, to draw, pull, cast, shoot.

tiro, _m._, throw, cast, shot, mark, aim; á -- de, within (the) range
of; -- de honda, sling shot.

titán, _m._, giant.

títere, _m._, manikin, marionette; no dejar -- con cabeza, to put
everything in disorder; to destroy everything.

título, _m._, title; titled person, noble.

tocar, to touch, sound, ring, play, blow, strike, reach, belong, fall
to one's lot, befall.

todavía, yet, still, however; y esta es la hora en que -- no le hemos
visto, and we haven't seen him since.

todo, -a, all, whole, every; -- el mundo, everybody; -- un mundo, a
whole world; a great multitude; á -- (el) correr, at full speed; Á --
escape, at full speed; á toda voz, at the top of their voices; _subst.
m._, all, everything, whole; de un --, once for all; del --, wholly,
entirely, quite, completely; en un --, in all its parts, in every
respect; sobre --, above all, especially; que de -- tenían menos de
artistas ó arqueólogos, who were anything but artists or
archaeologists.

toledano, -a, Toledan, of (_or_ pertaining to) Toledo; _subst. m. and
f._, Toledan, native of Toledo.

¡toma! See tomar.

tomar, to take, get; -- mano en ello, to take it in hand (_or_ a hand
in it); -- la palabra, to speak; -- el trote, to run away, make off;
¡toma! well! why! here! look here!

tomillo, _m._, thyme.

tono, _m._, tone; de buen --, fashionable.

tonto, -a, stupid, foolish.

topar, to meet, happen upon.

toque, _m._, touch, blast, peal, stroke, ringing (_or_ tolling) of
bells; el -- de oraciones, ringing for prayers; call to prayers; al --
de oraciones, when summoned to prayers; when the bells rang for
prayers.

torbellino, _m._, whirlwind.

torcer, to turn, twist, wind, deflect.

torcido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ torcer, turned, twisted, crooked, tortuous,
winding.

tormenta, _f._, storm, tempest.

tormentoso, -a, stormy, storm-tossed, tempestuous

tornar, to return; -- á ... , to ... again; -- á aparecer, to
reappear; -- á decir, to repeat.

torneo, _m._, tournament, tourney, joust.

torno, _m._, turn, circumference; en -de, about, around; en -- suyo,
about him; en --, round about.

torpe, slow, heavy, dull, sluggish.

torre, _f._, tower, turret, spire.

torrente, _m._, torrent, flood; á --s, in torrents.

torso, _m._, trunk, torso.

tosco, -a, coarse, rough, unpolished.

toser, to cough.

trabajador, _m._, workman.

trabajar, to work, toil.

trabajo, _m._, work, effort, labor.

trabajosamente, laboriously, painfully.

trabar, to wage; _refl._, to be waged; to arise.

tradición, _f._, tradition, legend.

tradicional, traditional, legendary, of legendary origin.

traducir, to translate, interpret.

traer, to draw, attract, carry, bring, take, lead, bear, wear; -- á la
memoria, to bring to memory; to remind; el cual traía una jornada de
catorce leguas en el cuerpo, who had made that day a journey of
fourteen leagues.

tragar, to swallow.

trágico, -a, tragic.

trago, _m._, draught, drink; echar un --, to have a drink, take a
dram.

traílla, _f._, leash.

traje, _m._, dress, robe, garb.

trampa, _f._, trap, snare.

trance, _f._, peril, extremity.

tranquilamente, tranquilly, quietly.

tranquilidad, _f._, tranquillity.

tranquilizar, to tranquilize, calm.

tranquilo, -a, tranquil, calm, gentle.

transcurrir, to pass by, transpire, elapse, pass away.

transfigurar, to transfigure.

transformación, _f._, transformation, metamorphosis.

transformar, to transform, change, metamorphose.

transparentar, to cause to shine through; to disclose; _refl._, to be
(_or_ become) transparent; to shine.

transparente, transparent, clear.

transponer, (of the sun) to set.

tras, behind, after.

trascurrir. See transcurrir.

trasfigurar. See transfigurar.

trasformación. See transformación.

trasformar. See transformar.

trasgo, nr., goblin, evil spirit, malicious elf.

trasparentar. _See_ transparentar.

trasparente. _See_ transparente.

trasplantar, to transplant; _refl._, to be transplanted; to migrate.

trasponer. _See_ transponer.

trastornar, to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, confuse.

tratar, to treat, deal, try; -- de, to treat as, consider; _refl._, to
treat, be a question (_or_ matter), be concerned.

través, _m._, obliquity, bias; á -- (_or_ al) de, across, through,
between.

trazar, to form, plan; mal trazado, of evil appearance.

trébol, _m._, trefoil, clover.

trece, thirteen.

treinta, thirty.

tremendo, -a, tremendous, awful.

tremulo, -a, tremulous, trembling.

trenza, _f._, braid (of hair), hair; _pl._, braids, braided hair.

trepador, climbing.

trepar, to climb, crawl up.

tres, three.

trescientos, -as, three hundred.

tribuna, _f._, tribune, pulpit, gallery, organ-loft.

tribunal, _m._, tribunal, court.

tribute, _m._, tribute, tax.

trigo, _m._, wheat.

trinar, to trill.

trino, _m._, trill.

tripas, _f. pl._, viscera; hacerse de -- corazón, to pluck up courage.

triple, triple.

triste, sad, mournful, melancholy.

tristeza, _f._, sadness.

tristisimo, -a, _abs. sup, of _ triste, very sad.

triunfar, to triumph.

triunfo, _m._, triumph.

trocar, to exchange, change, put off.

trocha, _f._, narrow path, path, by-path, crossway.

trofeo, _m._, trophy.

tromba, _f._, whirlwind, whirl, eddy.

trompa, _f._, trumpet, horn.

trompicón, _m._, stumbling; á --es, stumbling.

tronco, _m._, trunk, log, branch, shaft.

trono, _m._, throne.

tropa, _f._, troop, herd, band, body of soldiers.

tropel, _m._, noise, bustle, confusion; troop, troops, body, crowd.

tropezar, to stumble (con, upon).

trote, _m._, trot; tomar el --, to run away, make off.

trovador, _m._, troubadour.

trozo, _m._, piece, slice.

trueno, _m._, thunderclap, burst of thunder.

trueque, _m._, exchange; á -- de, in exchange for.

truhán, _m._, buffoon, clown.

tu, thy, your.

tú, thou, you.

tubo, _m._, tube, pipe.

tumba, _f._, tomb, grave, sepulcher.

tumbo, _m._, tumble, fall; somersault; dar --s, to tumble; whirl head
over heels.

tumulto, _m._, tumult, noise, clamor.

tumultuosamente, tumultuously.

tunica, _f._, tunic, (flowing) garment, gown.

tupido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ tupir, dense, densely twining.

turba, _f._, crowd.

turbación, _f._, confusion, trouble.

turbar, to disturb, trouble, confuse, alarm, startle.

turbio, -a, turbid, muddy, disturbed, troubled.

turco, _m._, Turk.

turqui, adj., used _only in the expression_ azul --, dark blue,
indigo.

tuyo, -a, yours, thine; el --, la tuya, yours, thine.


U


ú (before o- _and_ ho-), or.

ufano, -a, proud.

últimamente, finally, ultimately.

último, -a, last; este --, the latter; hasta lo --, to the utmost;
por --, at last, finally.

ultraje, _m._, outrage, insult, affront.

umbral, _m._, threshold; lintel.

umbría, _f._, dense thicket.

un, una, a, an; _pl._, some.

uncir, to yoke, harness.

únicamente, only, solely, merely.

único, -a, only, sole; el --, the only one.

unido, -a, _adj. pp. of_ unir, united, smooth; mal --, rough, uneven.

unir, to unite, join; _refl._, to unite, join, touch.

uno, -a, one; _pl._, some; (hasta) --s cien, (up to) about a hundred.

uno, una, _pron._, one, some one, a person; (el) -- y (el) otro, both.

unto, _m._, ointment.

usar, to use.

usarced, _contr. of_ vuestra merced (_antiquated_), you.

uso, _m._, use.

usted, _contr. of_ vuestra merced, you.

usura, _f._, usury.

útil, useful.


V


vaciar, to empty.

vacilante, staggering, unsteady.

vacilar, to vacillate, stagger, sway, reel; waver, doubt, hesitate.

vacio, -a, empty, void, free; _subst._ _m._, space, void.

vagar, to wander, saunter, flit, hover.

vago, -a, vague.

vaina, _f._, scabbard.

valentía, _f._, boasting.

valer, to be worth, be valuable, be responsible for; mas vale incomodo
que ninguno, better comfortless quarters than, none at all; _refl._,
to avail oneself (of), make use (of).

valiente, valiant, strong, brave.

valor, _m._, worth, courage, valor.

valla, _f._, barrier.

valladar, _m._, rampart, defense, embankment, barrier.

valle, _m._, vale, valley.

vamos, ¡vamos! See ir.

vandalismo, _m._, vandalism.

vanidad, _f_, vanity.

vano, -a, vain; en --, in vain

vapor, _m._, vapor, fumes, perfume.

vaporoso, -a, vaporous.

vara, _f_, wand, staff, verge, yard.

vario, -a, varied, varying, various, different.

varón, _m._, man.

varonil, vigorous, manly, spirited, loud.

vasallo, _m._, vassal.

vaso, _m._, vessel; pitcher; jug; (water) glass; lamp.

vástago, _m._, scion.

vasto, -a, vast.

¡vaya! See ir.

vecino, -a, neighboring, adjoining; _subst. m. or f._, neighbor;
_pl._, neighbors, residents, citizens.

vehemencia, _f._, vehemence, violence.

veinte, twenty.

veinticuatro, twenty-four; _subst. pl. m._, aldermen, the twenty-four
city councilors of Seville or other cities of Andalusia.

vela, _f._, watch, vigil; candle; grito de --, watch-cry.

velada, _f._, vigil, wakefulness, watch.

velar, to watch, wake, keep guard, watch over; to veil, cover, hide.

veleta, _f._, weather-cock (_or_ vane).

velo, _m._, veil, mist.

vellón, _m._, fleece, wool.

vena, _f._, vein.

venablo, _m._, javelin, spear.

venado, _m._, deer, stag.

vencedor, _m._, conqueror, victor.

vencer, to conquer, overcome.

vendaval, _m._, vendaval, strong wind (south by west); strong wind
from the sea.

vender, to sell.

vendido, -a, _adj. pp, of_ vender, sold, bartered.

venerable, venerable.

venganza, _f._, vengeance.

venido, _subst. m._, comer, arrival; recien --, recent arrival.

venir, to come, occur; -- al mundo, to be born; -- á romper, to break.

ventajoso, -a, advantageous.

ventana,_f._, window.

Ventura, _f._, chance, fortune; por --, by chance, perchance.

ver, to see, look at, watch, observe; por lo que veo, as I see;
evidently; ¡á -- á --! let's see! come now! estar viendolo, to see it;
to be present; _refl._, to be seen, be visible; no -se con, to have
nothing to do with, have no connection with.

veracidad, _f._, veracity.

verano, _m._, summer.

veras,_f. pl._, truth, seriousness; con todas --, in all truth (_or_
seriousness).

verdad, _f._, truth; con --, really, truly; -- es, it is true; the
truth is; ¿será --? can it be true?

verdaderamente, truly, in truth.

verdadero, -a, true, real, genuine, regular.

verde, green.

verdura, _f._, verdure, green.

vereda, _f._, path, foot-path.

vergüenza, _f._ shame.

verídico, -a, truthful, veracious, authentic.

verja, _f._ grating, railing, altar-rail.

verosimilitud, _f._, probability, likelihood, verisimility.

versado, -a, versed, skilled.

verso, _m._, verse, line.

verter, to shed, pour, pour forth, emit, cast.

verticalmente, vertically.

vertiente, _f._, waterfall, cascade.

vertiginoso, -a, vertiginous, dizzy, confusing, producing dizziness.

vértigo, _m._, vertigo, dizziness.

vestido, _m._, clothing; _pl._, clothes, clothing.

vestidura, _f._, dress, apparel, gown; robe.

vestigio, _m._, vestige, ruin.

vestir, to clothe, dress; to adorn, deck, hang (de, with).

vetusto, -a, old, ancient.

vez, _f._, time, place, stead, turn; á la --, at (one and) the same
time; á su --, in (its, his, her, their, _or_ your) turn; alguna --,
sometimes; cada --, constantly, continually, ever; cada -- que, every
time that; whenever; cuantas veces, as often as; de -- en cuando, from
time to time; every now and then; at intervals; de una --, at once,
suddenly, abruptly wholly, once for all; ¡acabaramos de una --! well
and good! en --, in place, instead; una -- más, once more; otra --,
again, once more; ór dos veces, twice; tal --, perhaps, perchance; una
-- y otra, again and again; unas veces, sometimes.

via, _f._, way.

viaje, _m._, trip, journey, voyage.

víbora, _f._, viper.

vibrante, vibrating.

vibrar, to vibrate.

Vicente, _m._, Vincent. _See_ donde.

victima, _f._, victim.

victoria, _f._, victory.

vida, _f._, life; á --, alive; con --, alive; dejar la --, to die.

vidriera,_f._, window, window-pane.

vidrio, _m._, glass, pane, window pane; --s de colores, stained glass
(windows).

viejo, -a, old; de puro --, from sheer old age; _subst. m. and f._,
old man, old woman.

vientecillo, _m._, breeze, gentle wind.

viento, _m._, wind, breeze.

viernes, _m._, Friday; Viernes Santo, Good Friday.

vigilancia, _f._, vigilance.

vigilante, _m._, watch, guard.

vigilia, _f._, vigil, waking, sleeplessness.

vil, base, vile.

villa, _f._, city, town.

villancico, _m._, Christmas carol.

villano, -a, common, low-born, base-born; _subst. m._, villein (or
villain), serf.

vino, _m._, wine.

violencia, _f._, violence; con --, violently, loudly.

violento, -a, violent.

violeta, _f._, violet.

vira, _f._, dart, arrow.

virgen, _f._, virgin.

visera, _f._, visor.

visible, visible, evident, apparent.

vision, _f._, vision, sight, scene, fancy.

visitar, to visit.

viso, _m._, appearance.

vispera, _f._, eve, day before; _pl._, vespers.

vista, _f._, sight, view, glance, gaze, vision; dar -- á, to come into
view of; perder de --, to lose sight of; tender la --, to direct one's
glance; to look, glance, cast a glance.

visto, -a, _adj. pp. of_ ver, seen, visible, familiar; no (or nunca)
--, not (_or_ never) seen (before); extraordinary, wonderful, strange;
por lo --, evidently, apparently, visibly.

vistoso, -a, pleasing to the eye, delightful, showy.

viuda, _f._, widow.

vivir, to live, dwell; no vivo hasta ver, I am dying to see.

vivir, _subst. m._, living, life.

vivo, -a, alive, living.

vocería, _f._, clamor, outcry.

volante, flying; columna --, flying column.

Volar, to fly, fly away, go by, pass, run.

volcán, _m._, volcano.

voltear, to turn, whirl, revolve, wander, flit, glitter, swing.

voluntad, _f._, will.

voluptuosidad, _f._, voluptuousness.

voluptuoso, -a, voluptuous.

volver, to turn, turn over, return; -- á ... (_infin._), to ...
(_infin._) again; -- en sí, to come to oneself; to regain
consciousness; -- grupas, to turn back; -- pies, to turn (one's)
steps; -- pies atrás, to turn back; _refl._, to turn, turn round,
return.

vos, you.

vosotros, -as, you.

voz, _f._, voice, tone, sound, cry, word; á grandes voces, in a loud
voice; loudly; á -- herida, in clanging tones; á media --, in a low
tone; softly; á toda --, at the top of their voices; dar una gran --,
to call out loudly.

vuelo, _m._, flight; al --, flying; on the wing; abatir el --, to
alight; levantar el --, to rise in flight.

vuelta, _f._, turn, return; lining; _pl._, cuffs, lapels, etc. (that
part of a garment turned back and showing the lining), lining; dar una
--, to take a turn, take a walk; dar --s, to turn, wind, whirl,
revolve.

vuelto, -a, _pp. of_ volver; --de espaldas, with (his) back turned.

vuestro, -a, your, yours; el --, la vuestra, yours.

vulgar, common, ordinary.

vulgarmente, vulgarly, commonly.

vulgo, _m._, people, common people.

vulnerable, vulnerable.


Y


y, and.

ya, already, now, soon, longer, indeed; -- ... --, now ... now (_or_
again); either or; no ... -- (_or_ -- no ...), no longer; -- que,
since; si --, if indeed; si -- no, unless; -- allí, when they had
arrived there.

yacer, to lie.

yerto, -a, stiff, rigid, motionless, lifeless, desolate.

yo, I.

yunque, _m._, anvil.


Z


zagal, _m._, shepherd boy.

zambomba, _f._, zambomba, a kind of rustic drum consisting of a skin
stretched over the mouth of a jar, with a reed fastened at the center.
This rubbed up and down with the moistened hand produces a strong,
hoarse, monotonous sound.

zampoña, _f._, rustic flute.

zarza, _f._, bramble, brier, thorny bush, bramble-bush.

zarzal, _m._, bramble, brier, bramble thicket.

zigzag, _m._, zigzag.

zumba, _f._, jest, joke, raillery.

zumbar, to buzz, hum, murmur, whistle, sound, resound, vibrate.

zumbido, _m._, humming, buzzing.

zurrón, _m._, bag, pouch, provision-bag.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Legends, Tales and Poems
by Gustavo Adolfo Becquer
Edited with Introduction, Notes and Vocabulary, by Everett Ward Olmsted

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEGENDS, TALES AND POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 10814-8.txt or 10814-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/8/1/10814/

Produced by Keren Vergon, Arno Peters and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


